[Amit Varma]: Too many of us think of the world in terms of binaries. That makes it easy to make sense
[Amit Varma]: of the world. The most common binary is that of good and evil. That's why mainstream commercial
[Amit Varma]: cinema has heroes who are good and villains who are bad. Keep it simple for the audiences.
[Amit Varma]: Make it easy to root for one side over the other. That's why there are so few nuanced
[Amit Varma]: gods in religion. And even in our politics, in an age where so much has become so tribal,
[Amit Varma]: we think in binaries. It's an easy way to make sense of a complex world. In these pandemic
[Amit Varma]: times, one binary that is all around us is that of the lockdown. So much of the discourse
[Amit Varma]: behaves as if there are two possible ways to act. One, have a lockdown. Two, have no
[Amit Varma]: lockdown. But the truth is that this is not a binary choice, but a continuum along which
[Amit Varma]: many other options exist. The best option, in fact, might be one in which we don't have
[Amit Varma]: a complete lockdown, but nor do we let the pandemic get out of control. What are these
[Amit Varma]: gradations? How can they be calibrated? What kind of metrics do we need to determine how
[Amit Varma]: much of a lockdown is needed? And what kind of data do we need to make good decisions?
[Amit Varma]: Most importantly, given the nature of our politics, and given how incompetent and ill-equipped
[Amit Varma]: our governments are, can good ideas even be implemented in practice?
[Unknown]: Welcome to The Seen and the Unseen, our weekly podcast on economics, politics and behavioural
[Amit Varma]: science. Please welcome your host, Amit Verma.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to The Seen and the Unseen. My last episode on COVID-19 was recorded in the middle
[Amit Varma]: of April with Shruti Rajgopalan. When I think of the time that has passed since then, it
[Amit Varma]: feels like it went by in the blink of an eye. When I think of all that has happened in that
[Amit Varma]: time, it feels like an eternity. There has been so much pain and suffering across the
[Amit Varma]: world, and especially across India, that I sometimes feel guilty to even be able to live
[Amit Varma]: a relatively normal life. There is so much to process about all that happened. Shruti
[Amit Varma]: and I spoke about how policymakers were faced with thankless choices at that time. No matter
[Amit Varma]: what they did, countless lives would be lost, and that cost would be viscerally visible.
[Amit Varma]: It would be seen, while any counterfactual would be unseen. And there is no way to calculate
[Amit Varma]: all the costs of any action, even in hindsight. For example, we know that the lockdown has
[Amit Varma]: been a disaster. There have been massive humanitarian costs, especially among the poor. Not having
[Amit Varma]: a lockdown could also have been a disaster, as our healthcare systems could have been
[Amit Varma]: overwhelmed, and again, the poor would have suffered the most. And it's easy to say that
[Amit Varma]: hey, do a lockdown but implement it well so suffering is minimal. But while that sounds
[Amit Varma]: good on paper, given how poor our state capacity is, that might have been utopian to aim for.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, as I argued in a column a few weeks ago, what India may have learned from this
[Amit Varma]: is that our flailing state is a bigger disaster than COVID-19. That earlier episode and the
[Amit Varma]: column will be linked from the show notes. Today's episode, though, doesn't focus only
[Amit Varma]: on what has happened in the last few weeks, but also on what we can do moving forward.
[Amit Varma]: My guest is Anoop Malani, a polymath public intellectual based in Chicago, who has a degree
[Amit Varma]: in law, a PhD in economics, and has worked closely in health economics over the last
[Amit Varma]: decade and a half. He has written papers on past pandemics, the insights from which inform
[Amit Varma]: many of his thoughts on the current one. And he's not a believer in pontificating from
[Amit Varma]: a distance. For years, he has been advising governments and working closely with them
[Amit Varma]: to bring about actual change on the ground. And in the case of COVID-19 as well, Anoop
[Amit Varma]: has put forward a plan for coming out of lockdown that aims to minimize death and suffering.
[Amit Varma]: It's a nuanced plan based around what he calls adaptive controls. It takes a position that
[Amit Varma]: both removing the lockdown completely and keeping it going as is are impractical solutions
[Amit Varma]: with huge costs. Instead, we need to have an approach by which we lift controls to varying
[Amit Varma]: degrees depending on local conditions, and we keep adapting to new data. He elaborates
[Amit Varma]: upon this in this conversation. And he also shares his larger thoughts on what the state
[Amit Varma]: and society can learn from this pandemic. We spend the first 40 minutes of a conversation
[Amit Varma]: exploring his personal evolution as a thinker, which I found fascinating. And we start talking
[Amit Varma]: about COVID-19 after the break around the 40 minute mark. Before we begin this conversation,
[Amit Varma]: though, let's take a quick commercial break. If you enjoy listening to the scene and the
[Amit Varma]: unseen, you can play a part in keeping the show alive. The scene and the unseen has been
[Amit Varma]: a labor of love. I've enjoyed putting together many stimulating conversations, expanding
[Amit Varma]: my brain and my universe, and hopefully yours as well. But while the work has been its own
[Amit Varma]: reward, I don't actually make much money off the show. Although the scene and the unseen
[Amit Varma]: is great numbers, advertisers haven't really woken up to the insane engagement level of
[Amit Varma]: podcasts. I do many, many hours of deep research for each episode. Besides all the logistics
[Amit Varma]: of producing the show myself, scheduling guests, booking studios, paying technicians, the travel
[Amit Varma]: and so on. So well, I'm trying a new way of keeping this thing going. And that involves
[Amit Varma]: you. My proposition for you is this. For every episode of the scene and the unseen that you
[Amit Varma]: enjoy, buy me a cup of coffee, or even a lavish lunch, whatever you feel it's worth. You can
[Amit Varma]: do this by heading over to seen unseen.in slash support and contributing an amount of
[Amit Varma]: your choice. This is not a subscription. The scene and the unseen will continue to be free
[Amit Varma]: on all podcast apps and at seen unseen.in. This is just a gesture of appreciation. Help
[Amit Varma]: keep the scene going. seen unseen.in slash support.
[Amit Varma]: Anoop, welcome to the scene and the unseen. Thank you. Happy to be here. So Anoop, you
[Amit Varma]: know, before we get to the subject at hand, which is the pandemic and the lockdown and
[Amit Varma]: the difficult few months that we've been having, tell me a little bit about your background,
[Amit Varma]: because I was sort of looking at your background and your CV and all of that. And it seemed
[Amit Varma]: to me that you're like the Forrest Gump of academics, you did a law degree, you clerked
[Amit Varma]: in the Supreme Court in the US, you did an econ PhD. And, you know, you've also written
[Amit Varma]: a lot of papers on medical and healthcare issues. So where did it all start? Where did
[Amit Varma]: the journey begin? What did you want to do when you were a kid?
[Guest]: Yeah, that's a great question. I do feel a little bit like the Forrest Gump of academics
[Guest]: and also the real world, doing all those different things actually puts you in interesting places
[Guest]: at different times. So I got a chance to see, for example, 9-11 up close. But let's see,
[Guest]: I think it probably started in high school, you know, typical Indian immigrant kid, parents
[Guest]: wanted me to be a doctor. And, you know, I think I probably wanted to satisfy my parents,
[Guest]: but my parents have very high standards. So, you know, again, classic situation. In seventh
[Guest]: or eighth grade, I did a science fair project where I tried to see the impact of radiation
[Guest]: on mice. So this was back in the 1980s. There was still a real concern about nuclear war.
[Guest]: And so I thought it'd be interesting to x-ray mice to see what the impact of radiation would
[Guest]: be on health. And so mice weren't easy to work with. My dad was a doctor, so was my
[Guest]: mom, but my dad was a doctor. And he said he would figure out a way for me to irradiate
[Guest]: the mice at his hospital, the hospital that he had privileges at. And so we went and we
[Guest]: irradiated the mice. And then I tracked the mice for, I don't know, I guess weeks just
[Guest]: to see what their IgG levels were over time. And I think my parents were super excited
[Guest]: because they thought that I was interested in medicine. And what I realized back then
[Guest]: was that I was actually interested in the research component of it. And so that science
[Guest]: experiment went well, more for me than the mice. And then I decided that I would be a
[Guest]: little bit interested in research. In high school, I decided I would debate. And I don't
[Guest]: know if you've ever debated, but debate is basically about making, not just learning
[Guest]: how to make arguments, but making other people's arguments and leveraging those arguments in
[Guest]: order to win a debate. And what I always thought during this process was, why am I only repeating
[Guest]: what other people's arguments are? Wouldn't it be more interesting if I could make those
[Guest]: arguments myself? That is to say, do the research that would help other people make arguments.
[Guest]: And so I think those are the two things I had going off to college. The other thing
[Guest]: I had was, you know, in high school, my form of rebellion wasn't to cut my hair in strange
[Guest]: ways or to, you know, wear crazy clothes. My rebellion was to decide not to become a
[Guest]: doctor, which, you know, in a family constitutes rebellion, which is not to say I wasn't going
[Guest]: to go to college. It was just I was going to do something other than medicine. So when
[Guest]: I went off, went to college, I initially majored in political science, mainly because that
[Guest]: seemed to flow naturally from the debate activities I was doing in high school. And then in college,
[Guest]: I got to take some math courses, and I realized I enjoyed math a lot more than political science.
[Guest]: And so while my major was political science, it's really just math classes I took for my
[Guest]: last two years, mainly at least. That's my main memory is the math classes. I remember
[Guest]: almost nothing about my political science classes.
[Guest]: And sometime around my fourth year, I must have been in my third year. So I was at Georgetown
[Guest]: University in Washington, D.C., and there's a famous bookstore called Kramer's Books in
[Guest]: DuPont Circle. And I would go there with some frequency and just kind of hang out. And they
[Guest]: also had a coffee shop. So back in the day, so in the 1990s, that was still relatively
[Guest]: novel. I would go and, you know, have a coffee, read books. And I happened upon a book by
[Guest]: Gary Becker. I think it's called The Economic Approach to Human Behavior.
[Guest]: And I, for some time, because of debate, just being curious, you know, tried to understand
[Guest]: how humans behave. Just, you know, I think everybody does this, try to figure out what
[Guest]: the world, how it functions so that they can figure out their role in it and how to interact
[Guest]: with it. And so I was doing the same thing, except, you know, I had a little bit of math
[Guest]: in my pocket. And so I, you know, was always trying to figure out how everything fit together,
[Guest]: you know, why I was attracted to the concept of democracy or, you know, what this notion
[Guest]: of this thing called rights is and how it made sense and how, what role should the government
[Guest]: play, you know, just kind of standard stuff that a political scientist would think about,
[Guest]: but from a mathematical perspective. And I can never really get it all organized in my
[Guest]: head. I had intuitions, but not a structure. And all of a sudden I happened upon this book
[Guest]: and it's an amazing book. And for the first time, I realized that people have been thinking
[Guest]: in a similar way. I remember I wasn't an economics major. I was a political science major. I
[Guest]: wasn't reading Chicago economics at the time, certainly not Becker. And so this is the first
[Guest]: time I had an eye-opening experience where I said, look, this person is thinking the
[Guest]: way that I want to think using the tools that I'd like to be able to use. And really I want
[Guest]: to study with this person or, you know, do similar sorts of stuff. So then I decided
[Guest]: to apply to grad school in economics. Now I had a political science background, but
[Guest]: I'd taken a lot of math classes and had some chances. So that was one decision I made.
[Guest]: I was going to apply to economics grad school. The other thing is that I was at Georgetown.
[Guest]: And if I remember correctly, my class, something like, I was in this program called the School
[Guest]: of Foreign Service. It wasn't the right best fit for me, but it was a program that I was
[Guest]: in where you studied, your focus was international more than, say, domestic. And my recollection
[Guest]: was something like 50 or 75% of students applied to law school. I'm not saying all of them
[Guest]: went to law school, but 75% I heard had applied to law school. So, you know, I'm a young kid,
[Guest]: so I'm going to do what the crowd does too. So I decided I would also apply to law schools.
[Guest]: So I applied to law schools and economics grad schools. And the only place that I got
[Guest]: into both was the University of Chicago. So that's how I got to the University of Chicago.
[Guest]: And so you know the background there. At the University of Chicago, the very first class
[Guest]: you take in the economics department is with Gary Becker. Well, the first microeconomics
[Guest]: classes. So this is fantastic for me. This is exactly what I'd hoped for. I felt so lucky
[Guest]: that I had this opportunity. Around this time, I also met a person named Jim Heckman. So
[Guest]: Jim Heckman was teaching, I think he taught the second quarter econometrics course. And
[Guest]: I didn't have an interest in statistics before grad school. And then I met Jim Heckman. And
[Guest]: Jim, you know, kind of introduces you to the idea of causal inference, which is to say,
[Guest]: you know, if you say X causes Y, in order to say that, you have to say if there was
[Guest]: not X, you would not necessarily or you have less probability of getting outcome Y. And
[Guest]: how do you think very formally about that kind of statement? And so he introduced something
[Guest]: called a potential outcomes framework, which I thought was fascinating. Obviously, he'd
[Guest]: been, you know, had seminal work in the late 1970s that introduced this concept, kind of
[Guest]: in parallel with Don Rubin. And so it was fantastic. And he and I hit it off. And so
[Guest]: the second year I was there, I think I was his TA for that course. And so there was those
[Guest]: were the two kind of big influences. We can talk about some of the other people I met
[Guest]: along the way, but but those are the two big influences that I had. And then Chicago is
[Guest]: a very strange place. Chicago is, you know, I think everybody associates with market economics.
[Guest]: And they take that approach very seriously in all aspects. So Chicago is also known as
[Guest]: a place that provides very little support. So when you start out, you have to, even if
[Guest]: you're a third year student or fourth year student, you got to make it on your own. What
[Guest]: does that mean? That means you figure out what papers to write, you write them, and
[Guest]: hopefully you're successful on the market, especially in the 1990s. There was no sense
[Guest]: that the graduate program was there to support you in your efforts on the market. Sure, you
[Guest]: can get a recommendation, but it was really incumbent upon you to come up with a paper,
[Guest]: incumbent upon you to kind of get out there, you'll, you know, the thought was, if you're
[Guest]: good, you don't really need a recommendation, your paper should do all the work for you.
[Guest]: And so I knew this during this time. And I was among a group of people that were quite
[Guest]: star, you know, that turned out to be stars. And while I did well, I was always worried
[Guest]: that these people were going to, there are not that many academic jobs out there in top
[Guest]: places. And so I was always worried, you know, what was going to happen. So some of the names
[Guest]: actually will be names that now many people will kind of appreciate. Yvonne Wernering,
[Guest]: MIT, Ed Vitlasil, I think he's at Yale, Matthias Dabke, who's made quite an impact in macro
[Guest]: and family economics, among others. And so I started worrying.
[Amit Varma]: I was actually very curious about the Gary Becker connection. Because you know, when
[Amit Varma]: I read that he was one of your advisors, you know, while you were doing your econ PhD,
[Amit Varma]: it struck me that he was, you know, almost the last intellectual of a certain kind, in
[Amit Varma]: the sense that he straddled all these disciplines, you know, Milton Friedman called him, quote,
[Amit Varma]: the greatest social scientist who has lived in work, but stop quote, and Justin Wolfers
[Amit Varma]: called him the most important social scientist in the last 50 years. And it struck me that
[Amit Varma]: in that sense, he was almost like a 19th century intellectual, that he wasn't bound by a specialization,
[Amit Varma]: that he was, you know, delving into all these different disciplines, not just economics,
[Amit Varma]: but also sociology, racial discrimination, crime, just a few days ago, I was reading
[Amit Varma]: his work on rational addiction. And it's just fascinating work. And it sort of comes from
[Amit Varma]: that classic impulse to try and understand human nature. And it seems to me that when
[Amit Varma]: I look upon your arc, and your interest in the variety of things that you've done, was
[Amit Varma]: he a direct influence in that sense,
[Guest]: it would be hard to understate how important Gary was, in the way we thought about the
[Guest]: world. So, you know, we had a set of tools, so some basic economic models, and some techniques,
[Guest]: some framework for the world. And we were taught to think about everything that way.
[Guest]: So, you know, for me, the first approach is to think about how judges behaved,
[Guest]: which I'll explain in a second, because I eventually turned to law soon after where
[Guest]: I left off, but, you know, thought about how judges behaved, how people answered surveys,
[Guest]: how clinical trials functioned, almost everything I thought of, I thought through an economic
[Guest]: lens. And the reason was, was Gary said that you should, and that it was fruitful to do
[Guest]: so. And he demonstrated it in terms of, you know, you've mentioned crime, we could talk
[Guest]: family, we could talk addiction, we could talk advertising, you name the topic, and
[Guest]: he's thought about it. And he wasn't alone, by the way, there was a foundation there,
[Guest]: you know, before then, you had, you know, Milton Friedman talking about the draft, you
[Guest]: know, obviously, then more classic subjects, but there's a wide range. So there's this
[Guest]: notion of, I mean, not in an aggressive way, but that economics should be hegemonic in
[Guest]: the sense that it should go to other fields, and try to introduce mathematical modeling.
[Guest]: And now, you know, that's kind of, I think, back then, when I say back then, I mean, prior
[Guest]: to the 1990s, I think that was extremely radical. And in some sections, it is still radical,
[Guest]: but not really today. I mean, today, the idea that you would take applied math and apply
[Guest]: it to every single topic doesn't seem surprising. And this epidemic slash pandemic that we're
[Guest]: seeing now is a great example of this. If you think about epidemiology, there's the
[Guest]: non-technical shoe leather epidemiology of going to find the people that are infected
[Guest]: and then addressing that. And then there's the applied math version of it, which is SIR
[Guest]: and more complicated models. And we are perfectly comfortable with that now. And I think that
[Guest]: part of that is, you know, the idea that you can use applied math tools and a structure
[Guest]: to address things. The only thing that economics really adds to that is to say, look, we shouldn't
[Guest]: just use math for biology or physics or chemistry. We should use math for human behavior. And
[Guest]: there's some simple ideas that can help you organize those mathematical theories to whatever
[Guest]: interaction humans have. And I think the ultimate example of that actually is people applying
[Guest]: it also to animals and animal behavior, which is another situation where it's just like,
[Guest]: look, every sort of interaction you can see in the world, regardless of what's doing the
[Guest]: interaction, there's a value to using applied math and some basic underlying principles
[Guest]: or axioms in order to organize that. And it's super helpful in terms of prediction, right?
[Guest]: It's really hard for me to understand how people behave until I have a framework to
[Guest]: think about it. And these tools that Gary had helped me think about that.
[Amit Varma]: Let's move on to law now. What was your experience there? Like, you know, you clerked for Sandra
[Amit Varma]: Day O'Connor in the Supreme Court. And what was that journey like? What fascinated you
[Amit Varma]: about law? And were you sort of looking at the legal system through the tools of economics?
[Guest]: Yeah, so that was an interesting journey. So I think the initial interest in law was
[Guest]: not merely, I kind of understated my interest in law. So I initially said that I was interested
[Guest]: mainly because everybody else at Georgetown was applying to law. That's not entirely correct.
[Guest]: If you, you know, debate in high school or college, you're going to think a lot about
[Guest]: politics. If you're a political science major, you're going to do it again. And a critical
[Guest]: component of political science is the law. And so there was an underlying interest in
[Guest]: the law. You know, when I first went to University of Chicago, I did my economics PhD course
[Guest]: work first, and I started to lose interest in law because I found the economics so new
[Guest]: and so fascinating. But while I was working with Jim Heckman, and not just as his TA,
[Guest]: but as research assistant, he introduced me to a gentleman named Richard Posner. I'd never
[Guest]: heard of Richard Posner before, which is probably more a sign of my lack of education than anything
[Guest]: else. Dick Posner was, at that time, a judge, also a lecturer at the University of Chicago
[Guest]: Law School, one of the founders of the law and economics movement, along with folks like
[Guest]: Becker and Aaron Director, and Ronald Coase, who was also there at the time. And he and
[Guest]: I hit it off. And we wanted to work together, either as RAs or as co-authors. But at the
[Guest]: time, I was working for Jim Heckman. And Jim is notorious, both in terms of number of hours
[Guest]: you have to work, but also in not allowing you to do anything other than his work. But
[Guest]: he respected Dick Posner enough to let me switch jobs. So I went from an RA for Heckman
[Guest]: to an RA for Dick Posner. And anybody that's had an interaction with Posner, and that's
[Guest]: Eric's father, will find him fascinating. He's like Becker. He is extremely prolific,
[Guest]: likes to think about everything, and is very systematic in thinking about lots of things.
[Guest]: I think a little bit more than Becker, he's willing to deviate from standard economic
[Guest]: models, especially as his career evolved. So it was very interesting to see that. And
[Guest]: I ended up being the kind of person that was defending the classic economic models, because
[Guest]: I was just a young student in economics at the time. And he was willing to push them
[Guest]: a little bit more. So we had some interactions. He convinced me to kind of resume my law education.
[Guest]: So I turned to law school. And one thing I discovered was that law school is very hard,
[Guest]: but it's not nearly as hard as economics graduate school. This is going to tie back into the
[Guest]: Supreme Court in just a second. I found, I didn't tell a lot of people at this time,
[Guest]: but I found law to be a relief from economics in terms of how much less work it required
[Guest]: to succeed. It was hard nonetheless, but it just was much easier. And that showed in my
[Guest]: grades in economics grad school were fine, but my grades in law school were a little
[Guest]: bit better as a result of the change in intensity, which I found to be a little bit of a relief,
[Guest]: too. So that performance and my rapport that I had with some of the professors that I'd
[Guest]: met indirectly, so Dick Posner and Richard Epstein and some of the others, allowed me
[Guest]: to do well enough in law school to apply for clerkships. And I was able to secure a Supreme
[Guest]: Court clerkship. It's very interesting. You get these clerkships ahead of time. So I knew
[Guest]: by my third year that two years after graduation, I would be clerking for Justice O'Connor.
[Guest]: In the interim, I was going to clerk for a person, a good friend named Stephen Williams,
[Guest]: who on the DC circuit in Washington, one of the main appellate courts. So that's how I
[Guest]: got the opportunity to clerk with Justice O'Connor. And that was an eye-opening experience
[Guest]: in the sense that it is the first time that I went from just writing papers that maybe
[Guest]: people would read or being an RA, in which case somebody else is writing the papers and
[Guest]: I was doing stuff in the background, to actually writing... It's actually the second year that
[Guest]: I was writing things of consequence. I would undersell it if I said I didn't have the same
[Guest]: experience my first year clerking at the DC circuit for Stephen Williams. That year, the
[Guest]: year that I clerked for Stephen Williams, we had the Microsoft case. So this was the
[Guest]: big antitrust case in the year 2000 that showed up before the DC circuit. And there, I had
[Guest]: my first big practical introduction to antitrust and got to learn a little bit about the tech
[Guest]: industry, which had just had a crash or was in the midst of a crash. So that was my first
[Guest]: opportunity to do something of direct importance. But then, you know, there's always a layer
[Guest]: above the appellate court that was the Supreme Court that made the ultimate decisions aside
[Guest]: from say Congress and the president that would make these decisions. And so that was my first
[Guest]: chance to see that in action. And also to see the process, not just, you know, kind
[Guest]: of help make decisions, but see the process. And so I found that very insightful.
[Amit Varma]: And were you thinking about a career in law at any point? Or in fact, to sort of rephrase
[Amit Varma]: that question, were you, as a person, were you driven by a sense of what you want to
[Amit Varma]: be like, I want to be X or Y or Z? Or were you more driven by problems that interested
[Amit Varma]: you that I want to solve this problem? For example, it was a you know, a problem that
[Amit Varma]: drove you to do your little test on mice when you were a kid. So were you driven more by
[Amit Varma]: problems? Or was there a sense of I want this to be my career? And I want this to be my
[Amit Varma]: path? How did you approach all of that? Because you left the law soon enough, and you kind
[Amit Varma]: of got back into, you know, academics and economics.
[Guest]: I don't think I had a grand ambition to be anything in particular. I've noticed two things.
[Guest]: One is I like shiny new objects. So if you present me with a new problem or a new thing
[Guest]: to think about, I'm always attracted and want to think about it. And probably have too much
[Guest]: of a tendency to drop what it is that I'm working on to think about that new, look at
[Guest]: that new shiny object and think about that new, new, interesting idea that you've got.
[Guest]: The second thing I guess I had a sense of is trying to organize my way of thinking about
[Guest]: the world, which is to say not only do I want to think about your new object, but I want
[Guest]: to figure out how that relates to everything else that I've been thinking about. It's not
[Guest]: like I have some notebook with a grand theory of the world, but I feel this strong sense
[Guest]: of trying to make things consistent and rethink some of the old stuff in light of what I'm
[Guest]: learning about new stuff. And so that was part of it. That sense of wanting to understand
[Guest]: the world, I think, is what probably led me to academics. You know, I don't want to undersell
[Guest]: the idea that going to a school where people judged you by whether or not you became an
[Guest]: academic in particular. University of Chicago was really bad because the standard was not
[Guest]: only are you going to become an academic, but are you going to win the Nobel Prize?
[Guest]: You know, that kind of pushed you towards academics too. So I did think about law, and
[Guest]: I thought about law because along the way, when you go to law school, it's very practical.
[Guest]: You know, you have to spend your summers, and I spent one summer only doing this, which
[Guest]: is working at a law firm. And I worked at two firms, and both of them were fantastic.
[Guest]: I realized, I saw for the first time that outside of academia, there are some people
[Guest]: doing some very important things and that are incredibly smart. So I worked for a firm
[Guest]: called Wachtell Lipton, Rosen and Katz in New York, which is one of the premier M&A
[Guest]: firms, among other things in New York, and just met spectacularly smart people who were
[Guest]: intellectually curious, but at the same time were very practical. They were resolving matters,
[Guest]: both in court and M&A deals, for example. And then I went to a place called Kellogg
[Guest]: Huber Hanson Todd, I think that's what it was called back then. It might just be Kellogg
[Guest]: Huber now, in Washington, DC. And again, same experience, just really bright people. And
[Guest]: I met a gentleman named Peter Huber, and he was one of the founders of the firm. And he
[Guest]: actually was found very interesting because he both continued to write books and had a
[Guest]: practical consulting firm slash law firm. And so that's when I first entertained the
[Guest]: idea of being a lawyer. There's one other per name I should mention is Ken Feinberg
[Guest]: is a person that I met who had his own firm in DC and he played a really interesting role.
[Guest]: He helped serve as kind of a private judge to resolve matters. So when you had like the
[Guest]: Agent Orange Victims Fund, or I think he might have done the 9-11 Fund, he was the one that
[Guest]: would allocate money from the fund to different claimants. So that was also very interesting
[Guest]: because he was also very intellectual about it and thinking about how do we not just figure
[Guest]: out who was harmed, but practically how you allocate a limit out of resources across these
[Guest]: people and account for proof. So I think that that really kind of got me thinking that maybe
[Guest]: law is a real career. And I think I probably ended up in a law school first for two reasons.
[Guest]: One was because it was a nice compromise between the two. It allowed me to see and respect
[Guest]: these individuals who were actually making, you know, kind of intellectual contributions
[Guest]: in a practical way in cases or in transactional matters, and at the same time keep a foothold
[Guest]: in academics. And one thing that people don't appreciate about law schools, especially modern
[Guest]: law schools, and maybe this is more so about kind of top-tier law schools, unfortunately,
[Guest]: is that they allowed you to think academically about a broad range of subjects. So you're
[Guest]: supposed to think about law, but they didn't penalize you if you thought about non-law
[Guest]: topics. And so that was the other thing that I think led me back to, you know, law, and
[Guest]: in particular legal academia, at least to start my career. I think that answers your
[Amit Varma]: question.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah. And it's interesting that you should describe the very smart people you met in
[Amit Varma]: these law firms as intellectually curious and very practical, because that also sort
[Amit Varma]: of describes a lot of the, seems to describe to me at least a lot of the work that you
[Amit Varma]: went on to do specifically in health economics, you know, which kind of almost puts you, you
[Amit Varma]: know, a decade and a half before COVID, it's almost like you were on a trajectory to bring
[Amit Varma]: you where we are today. So what were the sort of problems that, the shiny new things as
[Amit Varma]: it were, that drew you towards health economics?
[Guest]: So again, you know, it's going to be individuals to start with. So just around the time Jim
[Guest]: Heckman had introduced me to Dick Posner, I started thinking about how judges behave.
[Guest]: I also met this person named Tom Philipson, who's actually an important person in the
[Guest]: current context, because I think he's the head of the CEA, Council of Economic Advisors
[Guest]: for the U.S. President. And he was a health economist and had some really interesting
[Guest]: ideas. One of these ideas was that you could use economics to understand how people behave
[Guest]: during epidemics and how you can use economics to understand how people make decisions about
[Guest]: treatment for disease.
[Guest]: So I began having conversations with him and he was, you know, he'd begun thinking about
[Guest]: this in the mid 1990s. So he'd already kind of had a head start in thinking about this,
[Guest]: but I thought it was fascinating. And so we talked about that, but the one idea that I
[Guest]: latched onto that led me to kind of embrace working with Thomas a bit more was that he
[Guest]: viewed, he had this concept called a data market. And the basic idea is that when you
[Guest]: do a survey, for example, for research, you want to do a survey to see who people are
[Guest]: going to vote for. You want to do a survey to see what income people have. You want to
[Guest]: do a survey to see, you know, how has COVID affected them. You have to think of it as
[Guest]: a labor market, or at least as a market where the respondents are supplying information
[Guest]: and the surveyors are demanding that information. And there's some trade and you have to think
[Guest]: about what the price of that trade is and what the quality of the supply is here at
[Guest]: information.
[Guest]: And so that really started influencing me, made me think a lot differently or think very
[Guest]: differently about econometrics. Econometrics, we kind of took the data as given. We had
[Guest]: some discussion of selection obviously with Jim Heckman, but it made me think a little
[Guest]: bit more about whether or not we could use the idea of a market to improve statistical
[Guest]: inference from surveys. And so he and I wrote a paper together in 1999 about these and the
[Guest]: role that incentives play and how that changes the inferences that you'd make.
[Guest]: But anyway, the main thing that I got from that was, you know, Tom was very much in the
[Guest]: mold of Gary and allowed me to kind of think in ways that I hadn't about data. So connecting
[Guest]: a lot of the work that Gary was doing with the work that Jim was doing. And I decided
[Guest]: I wanted to work with this person more. So we didn't initially work on epidemics. I got
[Guest]: to that a little bit later, but we did work on, you know, another very interesting aspect,
[Guest]: which is the idea of nonprofits. And this also started moving me towards health because
[Guest]: in the United States, about 60% of hospitals are nonprofit. More, I think, if you do it
[Guest]: by bed. But so we started thinking about why are some firms nonprofit, some firms for profit?
[Guest]: And why do firms decide to, you know, sometimes choose each of these two different forms?
[Guest]: Why do markets tolerate it in equilibrium? And why does it only happen in certain sectors
[Guest]: and not in other sectors? So we started thinking about that. And again, that got me thinking
[Guest]: more about health. And ultimately, when I was writing my dissertation, I think I was
[Guest]: able to put, you know, three of these influences all together in a way that's very, I'd like
[Guest]: to think very Becker-esque. So I started just like many grad students at Chicago, I went
[Guest]: through many topics, and each of them were actually fine. So I had my first topic was
[Guest]: on how judges behave. The second topic was actually on whether or not this is the law
[Guest]: influence, whether or not the felony murder rule, which we can dive into if you want to,
[Guest]: but it's a very peculiar rule that says that if you, if somebody dies, while you're committing
[Guest]: a felony, you're liable for murder, even if you didn't intend it, whether or not that
[Guest]: rule actually works and deterred, it actually has very complex effects. And so that was
[Guest]: the second paper. But I rejected each of these papers. And the reason is because the standard
[Guest]: at Chicago was, are you going to write the thing that that is not only going to be published
[Guest]: in a top three or top five journal, but that's really going to, you know, kind of put you
[Guest]: on the map and put you on a track towards winning a big prize at the end of your career.
[Guest]: And I didn't think either of those were that big, but then as soon as I was done clerking
[Guest]: and was turning back to finishing my dissertation, I decided to dump all that because I had this
[Guest]: idea one day as I was driving to the airport, which is to think about clinical trials. I
[Guest]: was thinking about clinical trials. I don't know why I was thinking about clinical trials,
[Guest]: but I had this thought. I found it interesting that some clinical trials treated more people
[Guest]: than other clinical trials. That is to say, some clinical trials, you know, you look at
[Guest]: one treatment and you put half the people in control and half the people in that one
[Guest]: treatment. And then other trials, you'd have two treatments you're looking at and a control
[Guest]: and you do one third in each. And I thought, well, that's really interesting because especially
[Guest]: if it's a blinded trial, you know, you're going to have this differences. You're going
[Guest]: to get the same treatment maybe if they're common treatments across the two trials, you're
[Guest]: going to have different beliefs about it. And then it occurred to me that there's this
[Guest]: concept I had read out about called the placebo effect, where your expectations about a drug
[Guest]: affect the outcomes that you have after consuming that drug. And this is just because I was
[Guest]: doing background research with Thomas on data markets, learning how clinical trials work.
[Guest]: And it occurred to me that this is a really interesting opportunity to study placebo effects.
[Guest]: So I wrote a paper very quickly on how you can compare outcomes across two trials that
[Guest]: are looking at at least one common treatment, but that have different allocations of patients
[Guest]: to treatment. So different fractions getting treated to test for placebo effects. I immediately
[Guest]: called up Thomas as soon as I stopped. This was, you know, probably like an hour drive
[Guest]: at the end. I called Thomas and said I had this idea. He immediately saw that it was
[Guest]: a great idea. And he said, call Gary. So I called Gary and he said, yeah, that's a fantastic
[Guest]: idea. You should write that paper. And so within three months, I wrote a dissertation
[Guest]: on placebo effects. And so I knew also that that was actually a significant paper because
[Guest]: here are two people that thought not just it was an okay paper, but it was a really
[Guest]: interesting paper. And so that's how I kind of locked it in for me that I cared about
[Guest]: health economics, which is, you know, I had the data market stuff. I had now this dissertation.
[Guest]: So health economics was going to be an area I thought was going to be very interesting.
[Amit Varma]: And so that's how I ended up back at health. And that's a good time to take a quick commercial
[Amit Varma]: break. We'll come back after the break and, you know, get up to speed with bringing you
[Amit Varma]: to the current COVID crisis. And then we'll talk about that in some detail. We'll be back
[Amit Varma]: in a minute. Okay. If you're listening to the scene in the unseen, it means you like
[Amit Varma]: listening to audio and you're thirsty for knowledge. That being the case, I'd urge you
[Amit Varma]: to check out Storytel, the sponsors of this episode. Storytel is an audio book platform
[Amit Varma]: that has a massive range of audio books from around the world. The international collection
[Amit Varma]: is stellar, but so is a local collection. They have a fantastic range of Marathi and
[Amit Varma]: Hindi audio books. What's more, I do a weekly podcast there called the book club with Amit
[Amit Varma]: Verma, in which I talk about one book every week, giving context, giving you a taste of
[Amit Varma]: it and so on. Download that app and listen to my show. And as long as Storytel sponsors
[Amit Varma]: this show within this commercial itself, I will recommend an audio book that I liked
[Amit Varma]: on that platform every week. My recommendation for this week is Mitro Marjani by Krishna
[Amit Varma]: Swapti. This examination of the unexpressed desires and sexuality of a married woman took
[Amit Varma]: Conservative India by storm when it was released in 1966. And it still sounds as fresh and
[Amit Varma]: relevant today in 2020. So do listen to it on Storytel. Mitro Marjani by Krishna Swapti.
[Amit Varma]: Download the Storytel app or visit Storytel.com. Remember that Storytel with a single L. Storytel.com.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome back to the scene in the unseen. I'm chatting with Anoop Malani. And we've just,
[Amit Varma]: you know, reached that stage of the career where he's become interested in health economics
[Amit Varma]: and we'll soon get to COVID. But before that, Anoop, I want to take you back to something
[Amit Varma]: you said at the start of the show, where you said that you had witnessed 9-11 up close.
[Amit Varma]: And the tone of your voice gave away that it was something significant to you. So can
[Amit Varma]: you can you elaborate on that?
[Guest]: Yeah, so this was obviously September 2011. I had just started my job as a clerk for Justice
[Guest]: O'Connor at the Supreme Court. And everything was fine. You're just getting the hang of
[Guest]: things and all of a sudden, you know, one day we show up to work, we start pretty early
[Guest]: and then somebody runs into our office and says planes crashed into a New York skyscraper,
[Guest]: the World Trade Center. And, you know, everybody, just like everybody else, it was everybody
[Guest]: has their stories about 9-11. And, you know, at first, we were really worried. You know,
[Guest]: we thought that this was just a small plane. And then we saw the second plane. When you
[Guest]: see this happening in real time, you're obviously your skin tingles, your hair stand on end.
[Guest]: This is a significant event, at least for those that were in America, seeing what's
[Guest]: happening. And then we'd heard that there was a plane that had landed to the west of
[Guest]: us. So I don't know if you know about the geography of Washington, D.C., but to the
[Guest]: west of the Supreme Court immediately is the Capitol. And then to the west of that is down
[Guest]: a ways a bit is the White House. And to the west of that, if you go a little bit further
[Guest]: across the river, is the Pentagon. We didn't know that the plane had crashed in the Pentagon.
[Guest]: We saw smoke in the sky and thought the plane had landed in the White House, which really
[Guest]: kind of freaked us out. The place went on lockdown. The justices were evacuated. We
[Guest]: were has to leave the building. And all these men with guns came out. And so we ended up
[Guest]: watching with crowds in hastily opened restaurants and bars along Pennsylvania Avenue. At about
[Guest]: this time, it just occurred to me, you know, I was so worried about what was happening
[Guest]: there in D.C. I didn't realize my sister was actually in New York City. She was going to
[Guest]: med school there. And so I spent part of the day trying to find her and part of the day
[Guest]: trying to, you know, kind of get my bearings straight. And so that event, I think, allowed
[Guest]: me to see that these things that happen in the world that you hear about, I mean, it's
[Guest]: not the first major event that happens, that they happen to people and they're real events
[Guest]: and will have real impacts in a way that's not just a news story that you read about.
[Guest]: So that was the first thing that I realized that these are significant events. And one
[Guest]: of the things that I noticed, and this would happen to me repeatedly because there were
[Guest]: other strangely terrorist events that we've been close to, meaning not a participant in,
[Guest]: to be clear, but just to like be adjacently affected. It made me realize that there are
[Guest]: kind of two ways to address this. You know, I'm simplifying greatly here is that there's
[Guest]: some of my colleagues who say like, oh, these events happen and then they go back to their
[Guest]: regular research. And some people say these are events that one ought to think about more
[Guest]: seriously and understand the impact of. And I noticed that I kind of had the latter reaction,
[Guest]: which is I wanted to understand these events. And one of the ways that we did it, that year
[Guest]: that we had 9-11, we actually had three major events at the Supreme Court related to D.C.
[Guest]: One was obviously 9-11, which dwarfs all the others. But a second one was that we had a
[Guest]: series of anthrax threats and attacks against government offices, including the U.S. Supreme
[Guest]: Court just two months later. And then towards the end of that year, there was a sniper going
[Guest]: around D.C. shooting people from a white van, everybody thought. And so I was interested
[Guest]: in that last episode, the D.C. sniper, people thought were targeting people at gas stations.
[Guest]: And so people started avoiding gas stations. And so my immediate reaction was, well, I
[Guest]: wanted to kind of understand whether that was a rational reaction or not. And I wanted
[Guest]: to see if we could determine that by looking at where people went to go buy gas. And based
[Guest]: on that, kind of back out what their beliefs are about the threat. That is to say, how
[Guest]: much cost were they willing to undertake to go someplace else?
[Guest]: Now, that research topic crashed and burned because I couldn't get access to the gas data.
[Guest]: But when these crises happened, I was interested in trying to understand those crises and not
[Guest]: so much try to, you know, kind of push them aside and go back to what I was doing before.
[Guest]: I guess it was the shiny new object, but had more salience because it had affected me or
[Guest]: the location that I was in. And so that's how 9-11 kind of happened.
[Guest]: The one other thing I'd say about 9-11 that was a little bit controversial, not controversial,
[Guest]: but I think is a bit different is I feel that when events like this happen, people kind
[Guest]: of rush to conclusions about what that event means and what to do in response or what not
[Guest]: to do in response. And I don't have that view. My view is that at the beginning, there's
[Guest]: just a ton of uncertainty and that one ought to entertain a wide range of views and potential
[Guest]: responses and discuss them before deciding on any particular one. That's kind of controversial
[Guest]: because, you know, the other thing I observed during this is that not only is there a lot
[Guest]: of uncertainty, but there's a ton of hurting, which is to say people kind of hurt around
[Guest]: particular conclusions about an event and rush to judgment based on that hurt.
[Guest]: It's not irrational, by the way. And the reason I know that is because of an important paper
[Guest]: that Abhijit Banerjee wrote back in, I think, 1991-92 about hurting, that it can be quite
[Guest]: rational, but it could mean that people rationally rush to judgment and then the potential for
[Guest]: mistakes could be high. And so at 9-11, I think the rush to judgment, which I think
[Guest]: in hindsight, we know was the conclusion that the right response was a military response
[Guest]: and that Iraq and Afghanistan ought to be the targets. We learn in hindsight that maybe
[Guest]: that might not be the right approach. It might have been much more costly than the event
[Guest]: itself, but there's that rush to judgment. And so I think we see the same sort of thing
[Guest]: with COVID. That same sort of dynamics play out a little bit. But we should heed the uncertainty.
[Guest]: That's the other thing I learned, I think, from 9-11 and learning now from COVID.
[Amit Varma]: And that also, you know, just thinking aloud, it seems to me that some of the response to
[Amit Varma]: 9-11 might have been dictated by the fact that the incentives on the politicians were
[Amit Varma]: to appear to do something about the problem, instead of, you know, taking their time and
[Amit Varma]: doing things which might, you know, make an impact, but are not that visible. Do you think
[Amit Varma]: that played a part then? And do you think that is also an issue now?
[Guest]: Yes. And in fact, that is a very important point. If we were to write a book about this,
[Guest]: I would say what you just said is a theorem, which is that politicians feel the need to
[Guest]: act and that causes people to act probably before the information warrants it. Let me
[Guest]: offer a corollary to that theorem, which is that people that are in the business or have
[Guest]: the jobs of gathering information to inform policymaking are influenced by what the politicians
[Guest]: want to hear or what the policy consequences are. They're influenced by that when they
[Guest]: decide to gather the information, interpret the information. What does that mean? That
[Guest]: means that, you know, these stories that we hear about intelligence agencies, you know,
[Guest]: feeling the pressure to find evidence of WMDs, weapons of mass destruction, after 9-11 in
[Guest]: Iraq felt like, you know, they had to provide more evidence in favour than against, regardless
[Guest]: of what the data actually said, because that's what the people higher up wanted to hear.
[Guest]: And so you can imagine the same sort of incentives play out during COVID, which is depending
[Guest]: on whether or not your boss, which is your higher up in the bureaucracy, whatever government
[Guest]: you're in, do they want to hear that cases are high or cases are low, whether they want
[Guest]: to justify a lockdown or want to exit from a lockdown, that will influence what you report
[Guest]: to them. And what that means is that we may not always get the best information. And if
[Guest]: you want to be more sophisticated about it, it means that you have to account for the
[Guest]: incentives that the producers of information have when you interpret that information.
[Guest]: So in some sense, it goes back to that data market concept. But it's an important, I think
[Amit Varma]: an important corollary to what you said.
[Amit Varma]: And I was going to ask a question about incentives in the current case a little later on. But
[Amit Varma]: since we are on the subject, I'll just ask it now. And then we'll rewind and we'll sort
[Amit Varma]: of come back to health economics and your other work on pandemics, which is that, you
[Amit Varma]: know, when I think about what the incentives are for current governments, it strikes me
[Amit Varma]: that, you know, whatever option the state chooses now, the costs are seen immediately
[Amit Varma]: and the benefits are unseen.
[Amit Varma]: So the incentives of politicians are to play it safe in specific ways. For example, if
[Amit Varma]: I look at Prime Minister Modi earlier, his incentive was very much towards calling the
[Amit Varma]: lockdown and, you know, playing it safe rather than have the deaths piled up because of the
[Amit Varma]: deaths piled up from COVID, that would be, you know, something that would be a visible
[Amit Varma]: problem, especially for governments, which are particularly concerned about optics, as
[Amit Varma]: is the case in India, where a lot of the sort of your incentive is towards controlling the
[Amit Varma]: optics.
[Amit Varma]: And in a similar way, you have a situation today where, for example, I am, you know,
[Amit Varma]: I'm in Bombay, Uddhav Thackeray is the Chief Minister of Maharashtra. And there is a lot
[Amit Varma]: of pressure from the central government, you know, there's a narrative war that is happening,
[Amit Varma]: there is a theory that at some point, the central government wants to impose precedence
[Amit Varma]: rule because Uddhav Thackeray is not being able to control the pandemic here. And therefore,
[Amit Varma]: the incentive for Mr. Thackeray, whether or not he's responding to these incentives is
[Amit Varma]: a different matter. But the incentive on Mr. Thackeray would be to keep the numbers low.
[Amit Varma]: And one way of doing this is by not testing enough. And in fact, on a daily basis, one
[Amit Varma]: hears horror stories locally, of people who have had symptoms for 10 days, 12 days, and
[Amit Varma]: they go to hospitals and the hospitals refuse to even test them. So suddenly, you have a
[Amit Varma]: situation where these optics matter. And these other political dynamics matter and pervert
[Amit Varma]: the incentives to an extent where the people in charge may not necessarily be taking the
[Amit Varma]: best decision. As someone who works closely with governments, have you found that to kind
[Amit Varma]: of be a worry?
[Guest]: I want to be very careful with my answer here, because I want to continue working with governments.
[Guest]: So let me try a different approach, which is going to stay what you state, but in a
[Guest]: more general way and oblique way, but then ultimately agree. So let me turn instead to
[Guest]: an idea from evolutionary biology, which is one of the things I like to, this is an example
[Guest]: I really wanted to show. I was very excited the first time I was able to tell my kids
[Guest]: this because I've been waiting until they were ready to absorb it. But in general, we
[Guest]: think that more information is better. We meaning humans, at least modern thinking humans
[Guest]: that have university education, we think more information is better. The reality is that
[Guest]: evolution doesn't see it that way. That when you compare species, species don't have an
[Guest]: unconditional incentive to obtain information and truthful information. They have only the
[Guest]: incentive to gather the information that enables them to survive. Okay. So for example, this
[Guest]: can explain the difference between, say, humans who rely on sight, feel, sound, versus say
[Guest]: bats, who rely on sound primarily. And it's really, you obtain the information gathering
[Guest]: ability that's optimal for survival, not for truth. Okay. You don't gather all the information
[Guest]: that you want. So we talk about that in the context of evolutionary biology. Then I always
[Guest]: ask my kids like, so how does that affect other things and try to push them a little
[Guest]: bit like a law teacher might push their students. And I get them to see that that's everywhere,
[Guest]: that our incentives to gather information are a function of what the utility or the
[Guest]: value of the practical use of that information is going to be. But that that practical use
[Guest]: can also affect the way that we gather the information. So you're not always getting,
[Guest]: you know, quote unquote, unbiased information about the world. Now, bringing it back to
[Guest]: your topic, that same concept applies here, which is a government official, a politician
[Guest]: doesn't have an incentive to gather truth for the sake of truth, not only in the mundane
[Guest]: ways in the sense that, you know, information is costly. And so you need to economize on
[Guest]: on expending effort and resources on getting information, but also they might find that
[Guest]: certain conclusions have different payoffs or different conclusions have different payoffs.
[Guest]: So for example, in a democracy or in a place where public opinion matters, you know, what
[Guest]: the public thinks is important. So in that sense, when you're gathering information,
[Guest]: you're not really just trying to find an unbiased estimate of what's going on in the world,
[Guest]: whether it's the amount of COVID in the population, things like that. What you're really doing
[Guest]: is trying to solve a, you know, play a beauty contest. I don't know if you remember what
[Guest]: the standard beauty contest, the goal is, and sometimes stock markets are characterized
[Guest]: this way, the goal is, is to figure out what the price is that everybody else will want
[Guest]: to price the stock at, not so much what the underlying true value of the stock is. Okay.
[Guest]: And so that's the classic kind of beauty contest approach or structure for information acquisition,
[Guest]: if that makes sense. And so to some extent, I think that's what politicians are trying
[Guest]: to do. They're trying to figure out what is going to get the best reaction in the population.
[Guest]: And that's obviously going to be influenced by whether or not you are, you know, in a
[Guest]: lockdown now and think that what you want to do is keep that going for political reasons
[Guest]: or whether you're not in a lockdown, you want to get to a lockdown. I'm not going to pick
[Guest]: any leaders. I'm not going to pick out any leaders and point them out, but it's also
[Guest]: going to be the case that the dynamics between leaders really matters. So if you take one
[Guest]: position and somebody else takes another position, that's a political threat. What you'll want
[Guest]: to do is gather information that supports your views as opposed to that other opponent
[Guest]: in the political process. And so again, it's going to skew the information that is produced.
[Guest]: Now, you know, in a best case scenario, what would happen is that the data would be all
[Guest]: out there, unvarnished, and then you would just have to make arguments. I think that's
[Guest]: the kind of the best case view of the world, you know, kind of the way that legal trials
[Guest]: operate, which is all the data is presented and the judge decides as between arguments
[Guest]: that are made by the plaintiffs and defendants. But the reality is you have to think about
[Guest]: the incentives to gather information and the way to mask that information. And I think,
[Guest]: you know, what I'm looking for, and I imagine the most sophisticated politicians do this,
[Guest]: is that they realize that when they want to make decisions, they want to consider not
[Guest]: only the political aspects, but they'd like to see all the information. And I imagine
[Guest]: the most sophisticated or I'd like to imagine the most sophisticated politicians understand
[Guest]: that their underlings have to be given incentives to provide all that information and not the
[Guest]: information that the underlings think the politician wants. And so that way the politician
[Guest]: can make the best judgment, whatever the reason, whether it's to compete in a political contest
[Guest]: or to do well by the population or both. So I guess the thing that interests me in this
[Guest]: context is not so much, you know, what information are we getting now, but as we look forward,
[Guest]: what kind of structure should we put into place so that despite these incentives, that
[Guest]: unvarnished information comes forward? Does that make sense?
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, it makes absolute sense. In fact, you know, when I mentioned Modi and Uddhav Thackeray
[Amit Varma]: in my question, I did not intend to condemn them for the choices they may or may not be
[Amit Varma]: making. They are rational people responding to incentives. And I think what one needs
[Amit Varma]: to do is not blame individuals, but look at the system and the incentives the system provides.
[Amit Varma]: So I think the answers are structural. And when you mentioned the beauty contest, I immediately,
[Amit Varma]: you know, thought of the story of the two guys who are in a forest when a tiger spots
[Amit Varma]: them from a distance and starts running towards them. Have you heard that story?
[Guest]: Yeah, you just have to be faster than the other guy.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, so they're both running and one of them as the other guy that you know, we are never
[Amit Varma]: going to outrun the tiger and the other guy says I don't have to outrun the tiger, I have
[Amit Varma]: to outrun you, which is the way those specific incentives are structured. And it also then
[Amit Varma]: strikes me that, you know, let's again sort of zoom back and come to maybe a decade before
[Amit Varma]: COVID strikes. And you know, everyone knows that there is a possibility of a pandemic
[Amit Varma]: like this happening. Everyone also knows that it's a very low probability event. Now the
[Amit Varma]: thing is, if there is a low probability event, which has a relatively high and visible cost
[Amit Varma]: of prevention, you know, if it's really low probability, no matter how high the cost of
[Amit Varma]: the event might be, the temptation of the politician is always to avoid the cost of
[Amit Varma]: preventing it, because he can always be questioned on that. And that will, of course, carry an
[Amit Varma]: opportunity cost, whereas he could just spend his, you know, time and effort somewhere else,
[Amit Varma]: and not worry about the pandemic, in that sense, for countries which hadn't, you know,
[Amit Varma]: been exposed to this kind of a pandemic before. And of course, you know, Southeast Asia was
[Amit Varma]: better prepared, because they had been through, you know, other similar, much smaller pandemics.
[Amit Varma]: But for the rest of the world, is it then inevitable that they were going to be underprepared
[Guest]: when COVID came around?
[Guest]: The short answer is yes. And it was rational. So in the 2000s, in the first decade of this
[Guest]: century, I wrote a paper with a colleague of mine, Albert Choi, where the thing that
[Guest]: provoked it was this, exactly this dynamic, which is, you know, why weren't we prepared
[Guest]: for 9-11? Why weren't we prepared for global warming? Why weren't we prepared for whatever
[Guest]: it happened to be? And, you know, some crisis had happened, I forget what the triggering
[Guest]: event was, it might have been just 9-11 itself, but everybody was blaming the government.
[Guest]: And I thought, that's kind of silly, because, you know, it's rational for the government
[Guest]: not to act before a crisis in the following sense. If you survey the literature right
[Guest]: now, there are tons of warnings out there. Okay, there's warnings about global warming,
[Guest]: there's warnings about financial crises, there are warnings now about epidemics. The reality
[Guest]: is there's even more than that, there's warnings about the risk of asteroids, and so on and
[Guest]: so forth. And governments can't address every single problem. Okay, there's limited resources,
[Guest]: but they have to choose. And the problem is that you have experts in each of these areas
[Guest]: saying, mine is the most important crisis, or mine is the most significant crisis. And
[Guest]: the government doesn't know which expert is correct. So the challenge for the government
[Guest]: is to figure out how do you decide? Now, obviously, they're going to act on some things or another.
[Guest]: So for example, you know, the personal relationship between an expert and a politician might cause
[Guest]: that politician to weigh one expert's view a little bit more than the others. But in
[Guest]: general, or an expectation across these politicians, there's no particular thing that's going to
[Guest]: stand out that has a credible signal, except for one thing, which is a crisis. So when
[Guest]: there is a crisis, you know, terrorists crash in two towers in New York, and then the Pentagon,
[Guest]: or when, you know, actually the stock market crashes because of a, you know, subprime lending
[Guest]: in 2008, or when there's a actual disease that spreads, then politicians know they have
[Guest]: a credible signal that there's something very important, and that they have to take that
[Guest]: risk seriously. And that's a really kind of rational way to act, especially when it's
[Guest]: not just a one-time event that will never occur again, but it's an indicator of how
[Guest]: serious a class of threats is. So I think that, you know, 9-11 taught governments that
[Guest]: terrorism was something to take seriously. Whether or not it overreacted or underreacted,
[Guest]: that's a separate issue. That's where the theory of herds comes in. But that's one thing
[Guest]: that I think was the signal of credibility. The regulations that come after the 2008 crisis,
[Guest]: I think is another example in the United States. And I think that after COVID, we'll be much
[Guest]: better prepared for COVID 2.0. And it's this sort of theory, I think, that can explain
[Guest]: why it is that East Asian countries, like Taiwan and Korea, et cetera, were better prepared
[Guest]: for COVID. And that's because they saw in 2003 SARS. And that event, that prior crisis,
[Guest]: which didn't hit all countries, but hit a subset of countries, kind of got them to see
[Guest]: that this is a credible risk. And countries that SARS did not hit, again, said there was
[Guest]: no crisis, so maybe this is not a credible hit. And so they didn't take as seriously
[Guest]: epidemic control. By the way, it also explains why it is perhaps why Kerala has done relatively
[Guest]: better than other states in COVID responses, because they saw the Nipah virus crisis. And
[Guest]: so they saw this as a real risk, and so we have to prepare for it. And so to some extent,
[Guest]: yes, Kerala did fantastic. But part of the success that Kerala had was that it had an
[Guest]: early experience with the crisis, made it realize that this was something worth investing
[Guest]: in, worth preparing for. So your theory is correct.
[Amit Varma]: And would it also be fair to say, and again, this is a brief digression, but since you
[Amit Varma]: brought Kerala up, that one of the factors would also have been that they have stronger
[Amit Varma]: systems of local governance. And a crisis like this really becomes difficult to control
[Amit Varma]: from the top down the further away you are, because your information is that much diffused
[Amit Varma]: and the incentives get messed up. So the more local the actual governance is, the better
[Amit Varma]: the flow of information, the better the incentives, and the more chances that you're going to
[Amit Varma]: handle something like this.
[Guest]: Yeah, I would say there's two components about Kerala. So I want to think a little bit more
[Guest]: about the local, but let me go to the other one first and then come back to the local.
[Guest]: So one of the things I always found very interesting about Kerala, you know, there are various
[Guest]: people that have made the argument, I think Amartya Sen has made this argument, and among
[Guest]: many others, that Kerala performs very well relative to other states in India. And the
[Guest]: argument had been, you know, for some time, people thought that it was because the communist
[Guest]: government was doing a good job. I'm not entirely sure that's the case. I think Kerala was doing
[Guest]: well even before communists took over, if you look at historical data on literacy and
[Guest]: things like that. But I do want to give credit to the communist legacy a little bit. And
[Guest]: I want to tell you that there's costs and benefits and then get back to the local.
[Guest]: So the other state that comes to mind as I think about this is Vietnam. Vietnam has done
[Guest]: remarkably well if the data are taken at face value through this COVID crisis. And it's
[Guest]: not just in COVID, by the way, I have a separate line of research the last few years thinking
[Guest]: about slums. And Vietnam is very interesting too, because from what I can tell, not very
[Guest]: many slums, especially given its per capita income. And so one sense that I get is that
[Guest]: one of the things that communist governments do is build state capacity. And that is to
[Guest]: say build governments that are very capable of acting in whatever domain it is. And in
[Guest]: this context, there was a high return to having a lot of state capacity. And so that makes
[Guest]: me think that legacy of having a communist government in charge really built up the state
[Guest]: in a way that was helpful for COVID, both here and Vietnam. That would be my conjecture.
[Guest]: Now there are costs associated with that too. I don't recommend communism as a peacetime
[Guest]: government very much, actually not at all. And the reason is because I think that having
[Guest]: the government play a big role in peacetime means that you crowd out the private sector,
[Guest]: which in peacetime is, I think, a more effective method of providing goods and services to
[Guest]: the citizenry in peacetime. But certainly in crises, communist governments might have
[Guest]: an advantage worth investigating. So I think that's part of it.
[Guest]: Now in terms of the centralization versus decentralization, which is I think the point
[Guest]: that you were making initially, I'm not sure. I do think local governments have a strong
[Guest]: role to play. And having local state capacity, they have a strong role to play. But it's
[Guest]: also important to remember that there's a trade-off, which is the information on COVID
[Guest]: is global. That is to say you want to be informed about what's going on elsewhere, not just
[Guest]: what's going on locally in order to be able to make informed judgments. Then you want
[Guest]: to be able to act locally. So you want both local capacity, but a kind of a global awareness
[Guest]: of the risk to be effective. So I think the thing that makes this kind of interesting
[Guest]: from Kerala is they had a little bit of both. At a state level and maybe at a global level,
[Guest]: they seem to have, again, maybe I'm speaking prematurely, but they seem to have a sense
[Guest]: of the magnitude of the event. And they had the ability to think about it and act on it
[Guest]: at a local level. And to do so in a manner that wasn't, at least from an outside perspective,
[Guest]: wasn't as bogged down by political competition. So I think that's the other aspect of it.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah. And it's interesting. And just an aside, you know, how a pandemic can invert our sense
[Amit Varma]: of values where normally we know the damage that communism has done throughout the world
[Amit Varma]: in the 20th century, but suddenly in a pandemic, this aspect of communism comes to the rescue.
[Amit Varma]: Similarly, I think all sane people would agree that urbanization and population density is
[Amit Varma]: a damn good thing. That's why, you know, the history of humanity is one of migration from
[Amit Varma]: rural areas to cities. But now that same population density is, you know, turning out to be a
[Amit Varma]: temporary curse while this pandemic rages. Let me kind of take you back, let's say, three
[Amit Varma]: months, you know, when people are just beginning to realize that COVID is something serious.
[Amit Varma]: And at this point in time, and as you've spoken about at length, and we'll discuss, there
[Amit Varma]: isn't a binary between lockdown and no lockdown at all. There is a gradation of actions and
[Amit Varma]: conditions in between that we can start, you know, thinking about and measuring and working
[Amit Varma]: towards. But at the start before, you know, let's say in early March, when, especially
[Amit Varma]: in India, when people began to be aware of this, how do you look at the policy options
[Amit Varma]: before the policymakers before the governments, and it's easy to sort of, in hindsight, talk
[Amit Varma]: about all the mistakes that have been made, and many have been made. But what was your
[Amit Varma]: thinking at that point in time about how India should tackle it?
[Guest]: So the first thing that I thought was that we need more information. Now, we didn't have
[Guest]: a lot of information about what was going on. The information infrastructure was just
[Guest]: being built. But that was the first thing I thought. Then I thought, you know, until
[Guest]: we get the information ready, I can see the value of having a lockdown in the sense that
[Guest]: it would allow you to avoid an irretrievable loss. What do I mean by that? I mean that,
[Guest]: you know, just let's use the simple framework, which I actually don't think is wrong, that
[Guest]: there's really a choice between economic activity and deaths from COVID. And you don't know
[Guest]: what the magnitude of the deaths from COVID are. You kind of have a sense of what the
[Guest]: value of economic activity is. But there's a lot of variation in what the potential health
[Guest]: harms could be. And it's irretrievable in the sense that once somebody dies, you can't
[Guest]: bring them back. Now, I know as an economist, I can just put a dollar value on that. But
[Guest]: I want to understand that or appreciate that there is a kind of irretrievable loss to this,
[Guest]: or at least in the way that people think about this. In that context, you might want to be
[Guest]: particularly conservative at the beginning and try to do what is possible, maybe a temporary
[Guest]: lockdown in order to stop the spread of a potentially bad disease, focus really hard
[Guest]: on getting information about the nature of the disease, focusing not just what's going
[Guest]: on in India, but other places in the world. And on the basis of that information, make
[Guest]: a subsequent decision about whether or not to extend the lockdown or relax the lockdown
[Guest]: or do something else. That I thought was, you know, kind of seemed like a quick rational
[Guest]: response that you could have. The only thing that I would say there is that I thought that
[Guest]: the calculus was going to be different for the United States than for India for many
[Guest]: reasons. But the most important one is that the cost of a lockdown varies dramatically
[Guest]: across those two countries for two reasons. The first is you have a much lower income
[Guest]: population profile in India. A lockdown was going to affect the poor more than it was
[Guest]: going to affect the rich. You know, people that are on salaries can sit and take a few
[Guest]: weeks off work without really, you know, losing their income, or at least they have a savings
[Guest]: buffer, whereas people that are poor don't have those things. And so lockdown is going
[Guest]: to have a disproportionate effect on the poor, and India had a poor population. So that was
[Guest]: the first consideration. But the second thing, the reason I thought that lockdown was maybe
[Guest]: not as obviously an answer for India is that there's a difference in state capacity. So
[Guest]: the United States has a pretty good capacity to enforce a lockdown, notwithstanding the
[Guest]: riots we're seeing as a result of the police brutality against George Floyd in Minneapolis.
[Guest]: In general, the United States has a lot of state capacity to enforce this lockdown. I
[Guest]: was worried a little bit about India's capacity to do so. I have to say that I was actually
[Guest]: kind of surprised and it forced me to come up with a theory for how India was able to
[Guest]: enforce one of the strictest lockdowns. I think I have one, but it did tell me that
[Guest]: it couldn't last for a long time. It would just be harder as people chafed. And so that
[Guest]: would be the reason why I would think that while lockdown might be the right answer for
[Guest]: India, it would be a shorter duration lockdown than you'd see in other parts of the world.
[Guest]: And I think that's been a source of tension. I mean, it's TBD to be determined whether
[Guest]: or not India's lockdown will actually be longer than other countries or not. I think that,
[Guest]: you know, we're seeing that after June 8th, there'll be a relaxation under the newest
[Guest]: MHA orders, although states are free to extend. And you're starting to see some relaxation
[Guest]: in the United States, especially in the South. But those are the two reasons why I think
[Guest]: a lockdown, A, I think lockdown is a good idea, but B, I think that lockdown probably
[Guest]: would have, I would have expected it to be shorter in India than elsewhere.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, we are recording this on May 31st, by the way, and the episode airs on June 7th.
[Amit Varma]: So if many things have changed by then, don't blame Anupami. So, you know, you mentioned
[Amit Varma]: that you had a theory about how the lockdown in India would proceed. What was that?
[Guest]: Okay, so I think that if everything went well, meaning the government responded appropriately
[Guest]: in an idealized way, what would happen is you do a lockdown, you'd start gathering a
[Guest]: lot of information, you'd start preparing hospitals and things like that. So what does
[Guest]: that mean? That means you would use this opportunity to ramp up testing, to figure out what was
[Guest]: going on, to make sure that the lockdown was working, etc. And the second thing you do
[Guest]: is build out beds. That's really what this whole, you know, when people say flatten the
[Guest]: curve, you know, having, I'd worked with SIR models to some extent before this in a few
[Guest]: research papers. And so my sense was, you know, when you do a lockdown, you suppress
[Guest]: your transmissibility. That doesn't mean that unless your lockdown goes forever, it means
[Guest]: if you let up from the lockdown, the epidemic returns because your transmissibility rises
[Guest]: again. You're just delaying the kind of the jump in infections. The value of that is that
[Guest]: you prepare. So you make the, you do testing, so you know where to respond. But also importantly,
[Guest]: you build out beds so that the peak is not, while you might have the same number of infections,
[Guest]: the deaths from those infections would fall. And so that was the idealized response. So
[Guest]: that was part of the answer to your question. The other part that surprised me that India
[Guest]: was able to sustain this lockdown for so long, even though it is known to have a very low
[Guest]: rate of police per capita, that is to say low administrative state capacity, was the
[Guest]: following, which is, it occurs to me that when you have very little police force, it's
[Guest]: actually easier to enforce a lockdown. And the reason why is because if you can get the
[Guest]: population to just kind of agree to a lockdown, like credibly, they stay home, then it's really
[Guest]: easy to find violators. Because if there's very few people on the streets, the few people
[Guest]: that you find, you can go after with a limited resource, a limited number of police officers.
[Guest]: That is to say, it's easy to detect violators with even a low police force in a lockdown.
[Guest]: It's when you get to that intermediate stage where you begin to relax your lockdown, that
[Guest]: I think India will have more challenges than, say, the United States. The reason is because
[Guest]: it's harder to find the violators of whatever rules that you have, as there are more people
[Guest]: that are actually out in the street and interacting. And that's going to quickly overwhelm the
[Guest]: police force in India. Whereas in the United States, you might actually be able to enforce
[Guest]: that. You not only have a better population monitoring infrastructure, but you also have
[Guest]: more police per capita. And so that's how I, at least that's tentatively where I stand
[Guest]: for trying to understand how India was able to have a very harsh lockdown with low police
[Guest]: force per capita. It also makes me a little bit pessimistic about the ability to some
[Guest]: extent of doing more gradual measures. However, to me, I see that as a challenge. The challenge
[Guest]: that I get from that is how do you devise enforceable gradual social distancing as opposed
[Guest]: to complete social distancing under a lockdown? And as Jude mentioned earlier, my view is
[Guest]: that gradual social distancing or moderate amounts, especially targeted, is going to
[Guest]: be better for achieving the proper balance between economic activity on the one hand
[Guest]: and controlling infections and deaths on the other hand, both of which are, I think, very
[Guest]: important values.
[Amit Varma]: That's a profound insight. And I have three related thoughts before I sort of ask you
[Amit Varma]: further questions about, you know, the different gradations of social distancing. One of the
[Amit Varma]: papers I'm going to link from the show notes is the paper you wrote in the Journal of Development
[Amit Varma]: Economics with a couple of co authors called learning during a crisis, a SARS epidemic
[Amit Varma]: in Taiwan, where you speak about exactly this aspect of how the people themselves, even
[Amit Varma]: though there were very few cases of SARS, the people themselves started avoiding public
[Amit Varma]: places and restaurants and malls and all of that. And gradually, the pandemic everyone
[Amit Varma]: was scared of just petered out and you refer to how an informational cascade can play a
[Amit Varma]: part in determining mass behavior where they can overreact in one direction or the other.
[Amit Varma]: And it seems that those kinds of informational cascades probably did lead to more people
[Amit Varma]: staying at home during the initial part of the lockdown. So you're right that even though
[Amit Varma]: we have less police per capita, they would have had less policing to do because it'd
[Amit Varma]: be fewer breakers of the law. That's quite fascinating to me. My other sort of thought
[Amit Varma]: was and I discussed this in an episode I linked from the show notes, which I did with Shruti
[Amit Varma]: Rajagopalan on COVID, where she sort of spoke about how the cost of not having a lockdown
[Amit Varma]: would have been disproportionately on the poor, and the cost of the lockdown are also
[Amit Varma]: on the poor. Now the thing is, the thought that this brings me to is that unfortunately,
[Amit Varma]: in India, the poor are invisible. And therefore, when I go back to the incentives of the powers
[Amit Varma]: that be, I see two things. Number one is that the costs of the lockdown are less visible
[Amit Varma]: than they would be if the pandemic was allowed to rage. And therefore, it is sort of easy
[Amit Varma]: for them to build narratives that completely ignore that and say that no, we'll keep the
[Amit Varma]: lockdown going and we'll keep the numbers down because the other consequences that if
[Amit Varma]: they remove the lockdown and the numbers go up drastically, they'll be blamed for it.
[Amit Varma]: It is safer to continue the lockdown as it is. And the other aspect of this is that therefore,
[Amit Varma]: even though we want more information, even though we want far more testing, their incentives
[Amit Varma]: are actually to do less testing, because the less testing you do, the lower the numbers
[Amit Varma]: will be and the better the optics for you to make the case that hey, we did the lockdown
[Amit Varma]: and it worked. How do you sort of feel about, this might be repeating my earlier question
[Amit Varma]: about the incentives of politicians, but this seems almost an insurmountable problem to
[Amit Varma]: me when I think about it.
[Guest]: Yeah, so you raised three very important questions. So the first is learning during a crisis.
[Guest]: The second is about the impact on the poor. And the third is about testing rates. So let
[Guest]: me try to address those in turn. So first, let's start with the Journal of Development
[Guest]: Economics piece. So that was with Dan Bennett, among others, a colleague of mine at the Harris
[Guest]: School. And the interesting feature that we found in the SARS data coming out of Taiwan
[Guest]: was that even though this was a medical crisis, visits to hospitals fell dramatically. You
[Guest]: can see that in the claims data. And so then we tried to figure out what was going on.
[Guest]: And what we kind of deciphered through looking at the data was that what had really happened
[Guest]: was that people were worried that they were going to get infected by going to the hospital.
[Guest]: So they avoided hospitals. And paradoxically, that actually helped control the epidemic
[Guest]: because you had one less area where you were congregating. And one could make the argument
[Guest]: that hospitals actually were a vector for transmission of SARS. And we speculated that
[Guest]: this might actually have slowed down the progression of SARS. But I want to stress two things about
[Guest]: this paper that I think are interesting here. First is just a little bit of academic history.
[Guest]: So back in the 1990s, epidemiologists were already talking about SIR models. This has
[Guest]: been going on for decades, obviously, of disease, even diseases that afflicted humans. But they
[Guest]: never really explicitly modeled how humans reacted. And there are two scholars in parallel
[Guest]: that had introduced the concept of something called prevalence elasticity. One was Thomas
[Guest]: Philipson, who was on my dissertation committee with Gary Becker. And the other one was Michael
[Guest]: Kramer, who just won the Nobel Prize in economics. And they posited this idea that in the midst
[Guest]: of a crisis, that is to say in the midst of an epidemic or any disease, and they were
[Guest]: thinking about things like HIV, that people would take precautionary behavior on their
[Guest]: own in response to the level of risk. And when the level of risk was high, they do a
[Guest]: lot of it. And when the level of risk fell, they'd take more risk. People would do less
[Guest]: social distancing or other protective efforts. Now, what they hadn't thought about was how
[Guest]: people gauged that risk. Their assumption was people could immediately see what the
[Guest]: prevalence was, like the truth on prevalence, and then adjust their behavior. And so what
[Guest]: the JDE, the Journal of Development Economics paper, tried to do is think about, well, how
[Guest]: do people form those beliefs in the first place? And what we realized is they were not
[Guest]: looking at raw data. They were looking at, in addition to whatever data that might be
[Guest]: made available in the press or whatever, they were thinking about what their colleagues
[Guest]: were doing, what their neighbors were doing. And so you could get these big herding effects
[Guest]: where people really kind of strongly distanced themselves in response. So this ties back
[Guest]: into some of the work that Abhijit Banerjee did on herding. So that was the important
[Guest]: thing. It's important to remember how people learn about disease risk to understand how
[Guest]: they're going to voluntarily respond. So that was the first thing, I think, that came out
[Guest]: of that Journal of Development Economics paper that was interesting in this context. People
[Guest]: are learning about the crisis, and the amount of social distancing we'll see after the lockdown
[Guest]: ends will be a function of what they learn. Testing policy is going to be important, but
[Guest]: also what other people in the street are doing, what their neighbors are doing. And that's
[Guest]: a little bit harder to predict. The second thing that was really important that came
[Guest]: out of this was how to do cost-benefit analysis in this context. That is to say, you know,
[Guest]: the question you asked was, is a lockdown a good idea or not? And I think the initial
[Guest]: simple way that people thought about it was, well, you know, there's this tradeoff between
[Guest]: health and economic activity. And if you lockdown, you get health and you get less economic activity
[Guest]: and vice versa. And then there was this wave of belief that actually, no, no, no, that
[Guest]: if you release, you would get less economic activity, that the disease caused less economic
[Guest]: activity because people would voluntarily social distance even if there wasn't a lockdown.
[Guest]: And I think that there's some truth to that as well, except I think you have to combine
[Guest]: both views to really understand what's going on. And then the Development Economics paper,
[Guest]: the SARS paper, I think helps me think about that a little bit. So I think the way to do
[Guest]: cost-benefit analysis in this context, that is to say, ask yourself, what is the impact
[Guest]: of COVID versus what's the impact of lockdown, is to understand the following. And I apologize
[Guest]: if this is a little bit a longer discourse, but I've been thinking a lot about it recently.
[Guest]: So think about the chain of causation that you've got going on here. You go from COVID
[Guest]: or the disease, the disease causes some policy changes, and then those policy changes cause
[Guest]: some outcome along with the disease. And so if you're trying to figure this out, you can
[Guest]: break that up into two parts, which is to say, first, think about what affect different
[Guest]: policies, what the outcome would be in terms of number of, amount of disease, amount of
[Guest]: economic activity with and without a lockdown, let's say, just to be simplistic about it.
[Guest]: And then think about what policies are caused by the disease. That is to say, given the
[Guest]: disease, what policy is the government going to pursue? And that's how you can figure out
[Guest]: what the impact of COVID is, separately from what the impact of the lockdown is. Does that
[Guest]: make sense before I proceed?
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, that makes absolute sense. In fact, that was going to be my next sort of question
[Guest]: to you. So please go ahead. It's fascinating.
[Guest]: Yeah. So this is what, and I'm teaching a development economics class, actually just
[Guest]: finished teaching development economics. We did a little segment on this. And this is
[Guest]: this is kind of the way that I described it to students as well. So let's take the second
[Guest]: part of that step, which is, you know, what is the effect of policy on outcomes? And imagine
[Guest]: that there's two policies out there, lockdown or no lockdown, just for simplicity. And then
[Guest]: think about two types of outcomes, people dying from the disease and economic activity.
[Guest]: Okay. The important thing to remember is that when you have a lockdown, you have a mandatory
[Guest]: social distancing that will, let's just for simplicity say that non-pharmaceutical interventions
[Guest]: like a lockdown actually reduce disease. This should reduce the disease, but it will also
[Guest]: reduce your economic activity. If you don't do a lockdown, you will still have some distancing,
[Guest]: but it will be voluntary. People will decide what distancing do on their own. We call this
[Guest]: voluntary social distancing. So you'll have some voluntary social distancing, which will
[Guest]: also have these effects of lowering the number of cases and also decreasing economic activity.
[Guest]: And the real question is whether or not you will have more social distancing with voluntary
[Guest]: social distancing or with mandatory social distancing. And if you think that it's going
[Guest]: to be more with mandatory social distancing, then you're in the standard framework that
[Guest]: people initially had, which is the lockdown will cause more distancing, which will reduce
[Guest]: the disease, but also reduce economic activity more. Alternatively, if you think it's the
[Guest]: other way around, if you think voluntary social distancing will cause more, then you'll have
[Guest]: the opposite view. And ordinarily, you would think that mandatory social distancing is
[Guest]: more significant than voluntary social distancing, but that's not obviously the case. And the
[Guest]: evidence for this is actually Sweden, which has pursued a voluntary social distancing policy
[Guest]: and has seen remarkable reduction, not just in cases. I don't want to get into a debate
[Guest]: about Sweden, but they've seen a remarkable reduction in cases, but importantly, relative
[Guest]: to say the alternative modelling prediction, but importantly, they've seen a big reduction
[Guest]: in economic activity, suggesting that it's theoretically possible that voluntary social
[Guest]: distancing does more than mandatory. I don't want to extrapolate from Sweden because not
[Guest]: all societies are like Sweden. My kind of prior view is the mandatory social distancing
[Guest]: will actually achieve more social distancing than voluntary. And so I think that the classic
[Guest]: framing, which is that you get more disease reduction, but also more reduction in economic
[Guest]: activity with mandatory social distancing than voluntary is true. That is, I think the
[Guest]: right framework, although the degree of benefit might be smaller because in the counterfactual,
[Guest]: you would get some voluntary social distancing. So that's the first thing, the conclusion
[Guest]: I kind of came to. The second one, though, I came to is it took me back to Hayek, actually.
[Guest]: So one important difference between mandatory social distancing and voluntary social distancing
[Guest]: is that mandatory social distancing is coordinated, in this case, by the government. And the question
[Guest]: is, is coordinated social distancing better than uncoordinated kind of free-for-all voluntary
[Guest]: social distancing? Now, ordinarily, you'd want to say the answer is yes, but I want
[Guest]: to think a little bit more seriously about this. And so what I suggest is thinking about
[Guest]: cabining the different costs and benefits of social distancing at the individual level.
[Guest]: So when I'm deciding whether or not to socially distance, or I'm thinking about the costs
[Guest]: and benefits of social distancing to myself or in my vicinity, I think about the following.
[Guest]: Obviously, there's some private benefits. I've reduced my risk of infection. There are
[Guest]: some private costs. When I distance, I can't go shopping or go to work. And so that's a
[Guest]: cost. It might lower income. It might lower my consumption. But there's also a non-private
[Guest]: component of it in my immediate vicinity, which is the externalities I have. So when
[Guest]: I go out and don't socially distance, I might risk spreading the infection. And it's also
[Guest]: the case, though, that when I don't go out, I won't provide demand for the marketplace.
[Guest]: So I'm going to affect other people's incomes. Okay? So there are personal costs and benefits
[Guest]: to myself. And then there's these external costs and benefits of engaging with the world
[Guest]: or not. Now, the way that I think about this, and this is very much in a kind of a Hayekian
[Guest]: view of the world, is that I probably have better information about the costs and benefits
[Guest]: to myself, particularly for the economic benefits, and especially when there's a lot of heterogeneity.
[Guest]: Some people benefit a lot more. So if you're a salaried worker, the benefit's smaller than
[Guest]: if you're a daily or hourly worker. But society might have better information on the externalities.
[Guest]: And more importantly, they might do a better job ofor have better incentives. When I
[Guest]: say society, I mean government. They might have better incentive to account for the externalities.
[Guest]: Okay? And so when you're trying to decide whether or not I want uncoordinated social
[Guest]: distancing, voluntary social distancing, or mandatory, you're really making a decision
[Guest]: about whether or not you think that the privatethe heterogeneity in private benefits and costs
[Guest]: are bigger than the social externalities. Okay? If you think externalities are more
[Guest]: important and that the government has more information about that, you want the mandatory.
[Guest]: If you think the private heterogeneity is more important, you want the voluntary social
[Guest]: distancing. Okay? And I think that's how youthat's the second important component of thinking
[Guest]: about whether or not it's better to do lockdown versus rely on voluntary social distancing.
[Guest]: Okay? So now you've got, you know, kind of the two important things to think about when
[Guest]: deciding whether or not you think lockdowns are going toyou know, what effect the lockdowns
[Guest]: are going to have on both cases and economic activity, and which is better from a welfare
[Guest]: perspective. Once you have that, that tells you normatively whether you should support
[Guest]: a lockdown or not. And again, I'm simplifying lockdown versus no lockdown. Obviously, you
[Guest]: can do graduated measures as well. But then in order to figure out what the impact
[Guest]: of COVID is, I think people are a bit confused. What they need to think about is COVID not
[Guest]: only had an impact on deaths, but they also had an impact on policy, which then affects
[Guest]: those things. So the next step that you need to figure out is what is the likely impact
[Guest]: of COVID on policy choice by politicians? This really gets back to some of the original
[Guest]: questions that you had posed about how governmentswhat their incentives are. That's where that comes
[Guest]: in to play. So if you want to ask yourself the question, what is the impact of COVID?
[Guest]: You can't do that without thinking about what the impact is on policy. Policy is kind of
[Guest]: afolded into that question. So that's, I think, where people are not thinking as
[Guest]: clearly as I would suggest about separating the idea of impact of COVID versus what is
[Guest]: the right policy. So that's how I would split that up. And the JDE paper kind of ties back
[Guest]: into this because it sheds light on the private voluntary social distancing aspect of it.
[Guest]: Let me pause there so that you can kind of provide feedback before I turn to the other
[Guest]: aspects of your question, which is the discussion you had with Shruti on poverty, which I think
[Guest]: is super important, and then the implications of low testing rates.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I mean, this is incredibly fascinating, and I'll take time to process it. But a few
[Amit Varma]: thoughts that come to mind. Number one, I'd say that, and I think you'd probably agree
[Amit Varma]: with, you know, that original sort of framing of the choice as lives versus livelihoods
[Amit Varma]: is a little simplistic, because no matter what choice you make, whether you have a lockdown
[Amit Varma]: or no lockdown, if we accept a binary of just those two options, you are going to affect
[Amit Varma]: both lives and livelihoods. My second sort of thought from there is that we will forever
[Amit Varma]: be in an epistemic fog. There is no, you know, as regards to costs and benefits, there's
[Amit Varma]: no way to really say how the counterfactuals would have turned out in the very long run.
[Amit Varma]: And this is something that therefore will be sort of determined by whatever ideological
[Amit Varma]: proclivities one might already have, which, you know, and that brings about the curious
[Amit Varma]: situation where, you know, because Prime Minister Modi was for the lockdown, and President Trump
[Amit Varma]: was has sort of been speaking against it, that you have the left and the right on opposite
[Amit Varma]: sides of the debate in India and the US, where in India, the right wing is sending WhatsApp
[Amit Varma]: messages about how important lockdowns are. And it's the other way around over there.
[Amit Varma]: And it strikes me that this debate may never really be settled, because there is that epistemic
[Amit Varma]: fog and obviously, normatively, therefore, you and I would say that look, people have
[Amit Varma]: the best idea of the trade offs available to them, and let them make their own decisions.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, as in the case of Taiwan, you might find voluntary social distancing, actually,
[Amit Varma]: solving the problem if people are just allowed to make their own decisions. I mean, the counter
[Amit Varma]: to that, of course, would be what about the externalities, but as you pointed out, the
[Amit Varma]: externalities cut both ways, that if people don't socially distance, they are putting
[Amit Varma]: others at risk. But if they do socially distance, they are affecting the economy, the demand
[Amit Varma]: in the economy, and that will also take life somewhere down the line in unseen ways. So
[Amit Varma]: you know, I don't know what's the resolution of this? Because do you think that that epistemic
[Amit Varma]: fog can ever be lifted? Or would you agree that this is something that will be debated
[Amit Varma]: for decades about what was the right thing to do? And it will really depend on which
[Guest]: tribe you belong to. So I would say I'm somewhat optimistic, I'm cautiously optimistic. So
[Guest]: the first thing I'd say is, I believe that in a few years over the course of the next
[Guest]: few years, you will see more and more studies that more and more rigorously, although not
[Guest]: perfectly assess the causal impact of lockdowns. And obviously, you can't solve everything,
[Guest]: because you can't observe the alternative state of the world. It doesn't exist, which
[Guest]: is where we didn't do lockdown in India, or we released on different days in India, things
[Guest]: like that. But we will see a combination of epidemiologists and social scientists get
[Guest]: together and try to come up with counterfactuals. The only kind of pessimistic view I have is
[Guest]: that, you know, I believe that the people that are going to write papers that suggest
[Guest]: that lockdown worked are people that had strong priors that lockdowns were good ideas, and
[Guest]: vice versa. But my hope is that by seeing papers on both sides of that, we'd be able
[Guest]: to get a better conclusion about what is likely the case. Although, I still think I agree
[Guest]: with you that there's going to be a lot of uncertainty about what's going on, but hopefully
[Guest]: we'll be a little bit more informed. I think the thing that is going to be a little bit
[Guest]: more complicated, which you also raised, which is this heterogeneity, I think that there
[Guest]: are different impacts on different people. That's an important component of this. And
[Guest]: that's true both on the disease spreading side. So we're finding out now that, you know,
[Guest]: maybe different people have different proclivity to spread the disease, either because they
[Guest]: have more or less contacts than other people do. But we're also finding those heterogeneous
[Guest]: impacts in terms of what the economic consequences are. So, you know, if you've got a good savings
[Guest]: buffer, you're going to be less affected than if you don't have as good savings buffer,
[Guest]: if you're salaried versus wage employee. And when we think about the impacts of these things,
[Guest]: we have to understand, we have to appreciate that heterogeneity. That's becoming an important
[Guest]: part, a kind of a mainstream idea in econometrics these days. But we have to make sure that
[Guest]: we do that in policymaking as well. The reason why that's important is because it can lead
[Guest]: to a situation where we have COVID 2.0. I'm not making a prediction that we're going to
[Guest]: have it. But if we have COVID 2.0, we have to appreciate that even after learning, it's
[Guest]: possible that different governments are going to do different things, which brings us back
[Guest]: to your idea that the left and right are on opposite sides in India and the United States,
[Guest]: which by the way, incidentally, nicely ties in with your idea about political incentives
[Guest]: at the very start, which is, you know, very early on, there's some hurting that occurs
[Guest]: and the hurting doesn't necessarily always take you in favor of pro-lockdown or against
[Guest]: lockdown. But there's some sort of hurting occurs for each of the different groups. So
[Guest]: the right in the US might have heard it to no lockdown and the right in India might have
[Guest]: heard it to a lockdown. But then subsequent incentives are about sticking to your position.
[Guest]: And that kind of affects your incentives to acquire information. In the future, I don't
[Guest]: expect that to be any different. I just expect it to be a little bit more informed. I think
[Guest]: the way that if I had my brothers or if I could, and I've been thinking increasingly
[Guest]: about this is what do we do when COVID 2.0 occurs? We don't want the same sort of hurting
[Guest]: to make a decision. Ideally, we'd like is the best possible information to inform the
[Guest]: decision making. There's going to be a political role in the sense that the politicians have
[Guest]: to decide what the balance is between economic activity and deaths. That's a philosophical
[Guest]: slash political issue. I don't think that that economists or social scientists necessarily
[Guest]: have the answer to that. But they should be able to say, given your the way that you're
[Guest]: making a tradeoff, given the way that a democratic society or government makes that tradeoffs,
[Guest]: what is the best way to achieve that? My hope is that there will be less hurting the next
[Guest]: time around. I think that's what you see in East Asia now, with COVID 1.0, given the SARS
[Guest]: experience. And my hope is that you'll see that again in the future for all the countries
[Guest]: of the world, including India.
[Amit Varma]: Let's sort of move on to you know, the cost of the lockdown and how do we think moving
[Amit Varma]: forward like you've you've done some very thought provoking work on what you call adaptive
[Amit Varma]: controls, you know, which sort of goes against the notion that there is either a full lockdown
[Amit Varma]: or there is no lockdown, it's one or the other. And, you know, you have a notion of adaptive
[Amit Varma]: controls where number one, you argue that things should be done in a, you know, with
[Amit Varma]: gradations depending on how bad the situation is in different parts of the country and different
[Amit Varma]: parts of cities. And two, you argue that this kind of approach would actually be better
[Amit Varma]: than either approach keeping the full lockdown or removing the lockdown entirely. Can you
[Amit Varma]: elaborate a little bit on this?
[Guest]: Yes, we've been talking about this idea of a more gradual response to the crisis than
[Guest]: lockdowns. As I said before, I think that there is a strong argument for a lockdown
[Guest]: at the beginning of a crisis, because you don't know what risk the disease poses and
[Guest]: you need a little bit of time to protect against the worst possible consequences, especially
[Guest]: high deaths and high death rates, and gather information. But once that's done, once you
[Guest]: do that, you want to probably not use lockdowns as your strategy. You want to do something
[Guest]: that's a little bit more moderate. The reason for that is just because there's a high cost
[Guest]: to lockdowns. You're reducing economic activity and especially for the poor that can have
[Guest]: massive consequences. So you want to avoid those high costs of an extended lockdown.
[Guest]: So what is a better approach? I think a good analogy for what a better approach would be
[Guest]: is the way that you drive a car. When you drive a car, you have two goals. I know you
[Guest]: have many goals, but two primary goals. One is you want to make sure that you're driving
[Guest]: within the speed limit at a reasonable speed. And the second thing is that you want to pay
[Guest]: attention to obstacles, whether it's a pothole in the road or a pedestrian running out, you
[Guest]: want to be able to brake to avoid that. But when you do that response, you drive moderately.
[Guest]: When you're just trying to maintain the speed, you don't fully press on the accelerator for
[Guest]: an extended period and you don't fully press on the brakes for an extended period. You
[Guest]: try to maintain just a gentle adjustment of gas and brake to keep your speed target. And
[Guest]: then when you see an obstacle, that's when you brake, but you brake temporarily and then
[Guest]: you resume your course. Now, the reason why it's a good analogy for the epidemic is that
[Guest]: you kind of want to do the same thing as you're going along with the epidemic. What your goal
[Guest]: is is not to just immediately stomp out the epidemic. That's very costly. What you want
[Guest]: to do is you want to maintain the reproductive ratio, reproductive rate, I should say, for
[Guest]: the epidemic that's below one, so that it's gradually being driven from society. And so
[Guest]: I think of that as kind of your speed goal. And every so often you're going to have these
[Guest]: outbreaks and in response to outbreaks, you need to contain them. That is to say, you
[Guest]: need to slam on the brakes. And in this analogy, the way to think about it is that social distancing
[Guest]: is like your brakes, allowing economic activity as your accelerator. And you want to avoid
[Guest]: extremes except in rare cases, you want to modulate back and forth between the two. And
[Guest]: so that's kind of the intuition behind adaptive control. We just add a few other things for
[Guest]: adaptive control to make sense. The first one is that you have to choose your targets.
[Guest]: So like the reproductive rate or the trajectory of death or what your bed capacity is relative
[Guest]: to hospitalizations. You figure out what your trigger is, and then you gradually respond
[Guest]: to that trigger. That is to say, there's some mapping from what the data suggests COVID
[Guest]: is doing to your policies. But the policy response is gradual to avoid these extreme
[Guest]: cases. And the other thing that's important about this is keeping policy local. It goes
[Guest]: back to what you were saying about Kerala to some extent. The disease is infectious,
[Guest]: meaning they're going to be local clusters, unless you allow international travel or something
[Guest]: like that. But even then, it's going to be kind of local clusters. And so you'll want
[Guest]: to cordon off areas based upon those clusters and not stop all activity in society. So you
[Guest]: want to treat different areas differently. And so the way that we've been saying it is,
[Guest]: to the extent that you can draw cordons around areas, say districts or blocks or even wards,
[Guest]: if you have the capacity to do that, by that I mean you can stop travel between the two
[Guest]: areas, any two areas, then you should treat those two areas differently and just monitor
[Guest]: COVID in those areas. And when COVID becomes severe, you tap on the brakes a little bit,
[Guest]: have more social distancing. And when COVID has subsided, you can allow more activity.
[Guest]: And you just go back and forth that way with the goal of keeping the reproductive rate,
[Guest]: for example, below one. And over the course of a number of months, maybe six months, maybe
[Guest]: nine months, you'll be able to basically get back to the way things were before. In some
[Guest]: places much more quickly, in some places slowly. But this is a nice way to balance economic
[Guest]: activity with, it's a nice principled way to balance economic activity with infection
[Guest]: control. It's also really good when you don't have a lot of testing capacity, by the way,
[Guest]: or the ability to test, even if your labs could do all the tests, just that logistics,
[Guest]: you can't master them for logistical reasons or political reasons. And the reason is because
[Guest]: you will still observe outbreaks, people showing up at hospitals or deaths. And so even without
[Guest]: testing, you will see those events. And as long as you're doing things locally and can
[Guest]: cordon off areas, you can keep the outbreak from spreading. That's another big benefit
[Guest]: of adaptive control is that it accounts to some extent for inadequate or suboptimal levels
[Amit Varma]: of testing.
[Amit Varma]: So I have a follow up question. But before I get to that, let me kind of sum it up. So
[Amit Varma]: you can, you know, tell me if I sort of got it right. Essentially, what you're pointing
[Amit Varma]: out is that, you know, at whatever point a lockdown is completely removed, you're going
[Amit Varma]: to have a massive spike in deaths, or a spike of a certain size. And there's going to be
[Amit Varma]: an overall number that's going to be quite high, whether you do it today, or whether
[Amit Varma]: you do it a month off, all you're doing with the lockdown is you're delaying that spike,
[Amit Varma]: but that spike is inevitable. However, what you're saying is that what you can do is if
[Amit Varma]: you gradually release it, you know, in a graded manner across different areas, depending on
[Amit Varma]: local conditions, then you can control the overall number of deaths in the long run.
[Amit Varma]: And this is the best way to do it. Is that correct? Before I go on to my question?
[Guest]: That's exactly right. And then the other part of our answer is to build the tools that allow
[Guest]: each government to do that.
[Amit Varma]: Correct. Now, what I'm sort of thinking of is one, you spoke about the triggers. Now,
[Amit Varma]: it strikes me that whatever trigger you choose, let's say you choose the trigger of the reproductive
[Amit Varma]: rate, which is how many people each infected person is passing it on to which you want
[Amit Varma]: to be less than one or whatever, you know, depending on what the metric is, you decide
[Amit Varma]: on what level of control and what level of social distancing you're going to enforce.
[Amit Varma]: Now, you know, as we know, any metric that you come up with can easily be gamed. And
[Amit Varma]: especially when you consider the incentives of politicians, and you know, my listeners
[Amit Varma]: keep joking about how I only talk about incentives, but I've got to get back to it in this context,
[Amit Varma]: because the incentives of politicians will be to keep that number down. And there are
[Amit Varma]: many ways to do this, such as by not testing enough. And in any case, we don't have adequate
[Amit Varma]: testing capacity, to the best of my understanding, even after, you know, a couple of months of
[Amit Varma]: lockdown. And you know, the other part of this also is that at whatever, you know, different
[Amit Varma]: graded levels that you do, it does one really have the state capacity to sort of enforce
[Amit Varma]: that and what that also requires is that people higher up the chain of power have to then
[Amit Varma]: empower, you know, local authorities below them more than they would normally be comfortable
[Amit Varma]: to doing. So it seems that there is firstly a political economy problem here. And secondly,
[Amit Varma]: on the conceptual issue of look, whatever metric you choose as a trigger, it can be
[Amit Varma]: gamed. But are there triggers that can't be gamed? Are you looking at a combination of
[Amit Varma]: triggers like the amount of people who show up at hospitals, or just the overall death
[Amit Varma]: rate absent of cause, you know, and I'm just thinking aloud that when it comes to all these
[Amit Varma]: little practical problems of who's going to enforce this stuff on the ground, and who's
[Amit Varma]: going to take the decisions? How do you think about that? And it's a two part question.
[Amit Varma]: One is how do you think about that? And two is you actually have a lot of experience of
[Amit Varma]: working with governments and advising governments. What's that experience been like?
[Guest]: Okay, so before I begin answering those two questions, let me just say that, in my opinion,
[Guest]: you can never talk enough about incentives. So you should just keep up with your approach
[Guest]: to that. I think incentives are critical to good policymaking. You have to make policy
[Guest]: in light of the incentives, the private incentives that people have to act. All right, so let's
[Guest]: now turn to these questions that you have. So the first thing I'll say is, when you set
[Guest]: targets for adaptive control, it is super important to think about setting targets that
[Guest]: are actually meaningful in terms of the information they're providing. So for example, if you
[Guest]: just set a reproductive rate target, as you said, reproductive rate is crudely estimated
[Guest]: by looking at the number of new cases minus the number of recovered cases minus the number
[Guest]: of deaths, and you look at the trajectory of that from day to day, that's typically
[Guest]: how we calculate the reproductive rate without going into a lot of the details. Obviously,
[Guest]: the cases, the confirmed cases, that's manipulated by or affected by the testing rate. Not only
[Guest]: your testing rate per capita, but also who you're testing. You can test the people that
[Guest]: are high risk or low risk to manipulate that number. So you want to say, okay, well, I
[Guest]: got to be a little bit careful about this. How do I do it? One approach is to change
[Guest]: the trigger to something that's a little bit less easy to game. So look at just deaths.
[Guest]: So deaths can be hidden, but it's harder to hide than confirmed COVID cases. Obviously,
[Guest]: if there's COVID confirmed deaths, then obviously you still have the same testing issue, but
[Guest]: deaths might be less difficult to hide. So you might say, I want a different trigger,
[Guest]: which is deaths or trajectory of deaths. Alternatively, you can decide that you're going to modify
[Guest]: your trigger and say, it's going to be a combination of your reproductive rate and your testing
[Guest]: rate. So if your testing rate is very low, then I'm going to impose more social distancing,
[Guest]: independent of what the reproductive rate is. Or if you do a high testing rate, then
[Guest]: I'll focus on your reproductive rate. Okay? And that way you give people the incentives
[Guest]: to test. Now, obviously when you devise those rules, you need to think about two things.
[Guest]: A, it's not just the testing rate, but who you're deciding to test. So testing policy
[Guest]: is important. This is something that people have been harping about since the beginning
[Guest]: of the crisis. It's important not just to test the people that show up at the hospital,
[Guest]: which are people that are already sick or test symptomatic people, which avoids the
[Guest]: asymptomatic people, but also to test the community. So you're getting both symptomatic
[Guest]: and asymptomatic and not people that are selected based upon the severity of their illness.
[Guest]: So that's one approach that you can take, which is focused on the quality of the testing.
[Guest]: The second approach you can take is just be more sophisticated in the way that you do
[Guest]: your analysis of the data. So this is another thing that we're thinking about. We don't
[Guest]: have a lot of community tests in India, virtually none, frankly, from what I can tell. But we
[Guest]: have a ton of data on tests already done and features about those tests and characteristic
[Guest]: Indian government style. They gather actually a lot of data on whatever it is that they
[Guest]: do. If you can get access to those data, that is to say either academics or researchers
[Guest]: getting access to that data, or if you're a statistician sitting in the government,
[Guest]: the question is, what can you do with even that selected data?
[Guest]: If you know what the testing strategy is, we think that there might be ways to interpret
[Guest]: that data as well. And so that's another approach that you can take. You can either modify your
[Guest]: trigger to have better testing that's higher quality testing, or you could do more fancier
[Guest]: statistical footwork to try to make the best of whatever data is made available. So even
[Guest]: if people try to keep the testing rate low or select, maybe you can correct for it. So
[Guest]: that's the second way that you want to do. But you want to adjust your trigger to be
[Guest]: robust to the data that you get and issues with that data, including incentives to gather
[Guest]: that data. So that's the way it works with triggers.
[Guest]: Now, the problem with that approach obviously is that's great in an ideal sense, setting
[Guest]: good triggers, but the same people that are going to make a decision about lockdown are
[Guest]: going to make a decision about adaptive control. And so if they have an incentive not to get
[Guest]: accurate information, they're going to have an incentive to make sure that their adaptive
[Guest]: control triggers are also not getting accurate information. So that I think is the challenge
[Guest]: with implementing adaptive control. And we're thinking about how to actually do that.
[Guest]: And that's a nice segue into your first question, as it turns out. Sorry for such a long prelude,
[Guest]: but it's about decision-making within the government. And you're right. I've spent some
[Guest]: years working with different governments, either in a kind of adjacent to the research
[Guest]: that I do, which is often on trying to understand the impact of different government programs
[Guest]: like Rasya Swasta Bhima Yojana, or other programs like Mission Kakhtiya, trying to work with
[Guest]: the government to evaluate those. You learn about what the government's decision-making
[Guest]: processes are, and you then can kind of get a sense of, they often ask you for help, and
[Guest]: you can get a sense of how they're making decisions and what they care about.
[Guest]: And the other approach is through the, which you'd mentioned earlier, I have this program
[Guest]: called the International Innovation Corps that sends people, graduates of Indian universities
[Guest]: or people that are working as consultants or programmers or engineers in India, to go
[Guest]: work, not just in the private sector, but to go work for the government on some government
[Guest]: program for one to three years to help implement it. We think that's a valuable tool for them
[Guest]: to see how the government functions and to improve, provide support to the government.
[Guest]: As part of that, we also get some purview into decision-making, not on the research
[Guest]: side, but the implementation side. And in that process, I've learned a few things.
[Guest]: The first is, there are people that have, you know, people certainly respond to incentives,
[Guest]: political incentives, but at the same time, there are a lot of people in the government
[Guest]: who really are just trying to make Indian society better. For those people, I think
[Guest]: it's better to think not in terms of politics as being the aim, but politics being a constraint.
[Guest]: And your goal should be, how do I help them make policy subject to political constraints?
[Guest]: Okay, not seeking the first best, but looking for the second best. And that's both in the
[Guest]: short run and in the long run, setting up structural features of decision-making that
[Guest]: enable them to have more latitude, more relaxed political constraints down the road. And a
[Guest]: lot of that is a function of, you know, building relationships over time. You help governments
[Guest]: for a little bit. You build individual relationships with particular bureaucrats, IS officers and
[Guest]: state officers. And then through that relationship, you build the trust that gets those people
[Guest]: to listen to you a little bit more. So that's one approach that you can take. And the other
[Guest]: thing is to broadly help build an ecosystem where there are more officers like that. And
[Guest]: that's making, for example, investment in the training of bureaucrats. It's fostering
[Guest]: both a dialogue in academia and in the media where it's not immediately critical of the
[Guest]: government, but it's more understanding of what government constraints are. So there
[Guest]: can be a level of trust between bureaucrats more generally and people like us that are
[Guest]: trying to discuss, critique, inform policy from the outside. And so I think that's another
[Guest]: important lesson that I learned. This is a long process. I think we all have a role to
[Guest]: play, but it's important to remember that government bureaucrats have constraints and
[Guest]: we need to account for those constraints. So I think that's my answer to your decision-making.
[Guest]: You're going to have to remind me of your second question though. It's been some time.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, this was my second question. You answered the first question during what you called
[Amit Varma]: your prelude to answering this question. But just a brief follow up on this. You were also
[Amit Varma]: talking with governments now and advising them, right? So, you know, how receptive have
[Amit Varma]: they been to your ideas of adaptive controls? Do they come to you with preconceived notions
[Amit Varma]: of what they already want and they want backup for that? Or are they also, you know, desperately
[Amit Varma]: trying to figure out what is the right thing to do and find a way to do it?
[Guest]: I think it's a mix. You know, usually when I have these conversations with governments,
[Guest]: I don't come in knowing exactly what to do. Well, I always have a notion of what to do,
[Guest]: but I'm confident that I don't know the full answer. And the reason is because very often
[Guest]: in almost every conversation, I get new pieces of data from the government, whether it's
[Guest]: facts on the ground shifted or whether it's the political constraints that are in operation.
[Guest]: By the way, political constraints are real reasons. I mean, I think it's naive to just
[Guest]: ignore those issues. They are real constraints and they sometimes have rational bases as
[Guest]: well. I mean, we're a democratic society. And so this is a side effect of a democratic
[Guest]: society. So I find that what typically happens is I have some notion. They give me some data.
[Guest]: I try in real time to see how my answer has to adapt to those realities that they're telling
[Guest]: me. And if I can answer it right away, that's great. Otherwise, what I do is I say, you
[Guest]: know, I need to think about this. Give me a day to write you a one pager in response,
[Guest]: which is very often my answer. And the key is just providing that back very quickly so
[Guest]: that we can set up for the next conversation. But yeah, that's typically the dynamic that
[Guest]: we have. And I have to be honest, there's heterogeneity, but I will tell you there's
[Guest]: also selection. What do I mean by that? I mean, some bureaucrats are more open to outside
[Guest]: advice. There are obviously differences in how much they are responding to private incentives
[Guest]: versus social incentives to make Indian society better. I will not deny that. But I also have
[Guest]: to acknowledge that the folks that are willing to talk to me are probably going to be more
[Guest]: on the side of, you know, being responsive, being open to these ideas from the outside.
[Guest]: And so I understand that I'm seeing a selective population. But based upon that selective
[Guest]: population, I'm actually, I think, more optimistic than a lot of my close friends are in this
[Guest]: context, even though I know that it's a selective population. Does that make sense?
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, it makes a lot of sense. And in fact, you seem very hopeful and optimistic, which
[Amit Varma]: is, you know, maybe it's, you know, a result of my having just lived in India and lived
[Amit Varma]: in Bombay all this time that I sort of have this very dark negative view of government
[Amit Varma]: and the way incentives function, but I'm hoping to learn that I'm wrong in some way or the
[Amit Varma]: other. Let's turn to the economy now. I mean, there's no question that there has been devastation,
[Amit Varma]: you know, whether it is because of the botching of the lockdown, or whether it is ultimately
[Amit Varma]: because of COVID, which caused the lockdown to happen. Those are sort of separate debates.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, they are intertwined. But one very interesting aspect of this devastation
[Amit Varma]: is what has happened to migrant workers, where, you know, 10s of 1000s of migrant workers
[Amit Varma]: have left the cities and gone back, almost in a process of de urbanization. And what
[Amit Varma]: is especially tragic about it, what is heartbreaking about it is that many of these people from
[Amit Varma]: the reports that we hear have completely lost faith. You know, there will be people for
[Amit Varma]: example, when the Bangalore lockdown was being lifted, and there were migrant workers on
[Amit Varma]: the road who wanted to walk back to UP and they were asked, you know, why do you want
[Amit Varma]: to walk back, the lockdowns lifted, your job will be back. And they said, No, no, we want
[Amit Varma]: to die at home. We've had enough of this. And there has been that deep loss of trust.
[Amit Varma]: And the dehumanization that has taken place has possibly driven many of them away from
[Amit Varma]: the cities permanently in the sense that you hear people saying that no matter what happens,
[Amit Varma]: it's not about a livelihood anymore, we will not go back there. Now, this is, of course,
[Amit Varma]: just so disturbing at so many levels, at the humanitarian level, obviously, and and the
[Amit Varma]: deeper repercussions are that urbanization has always been an engine of growth, you know,
[Amit Varma]: and there was a sense that India is urbanizing rapidly, and it's a good thing and people
[Amit Varma]: are themselves making the choice to go to cities. And that's been the overwhelming sort
[Amit Varma]: of tide of movement from rural areas to cities, where they are part of these large economic
[Amit Varma]: networks, where, you know, they can contribute so much more and get so much more back. And
[Amit Varma]: now perhaps, I mean, I don't even know if it's the first time in history that it's happening
[Amit Varma]: with at least in India for this short term, in the last couple of months, a movement has
[Amit Varma]: been the other way. And it seems like it might not be a temporary thing. What are your feelings
[Amit Varma]: on this? Like, is it going to have long term consequences? And how should we deal with
[Amit Varma]: that? How should we approach this?
[Guest]: So I think that's a critical topic. But before I turn to that, I want to go back to to your
[Guest]: last question, just a little bit, actually, your prelude to this question, where you said
[Guest]: that I'm more optimistic than you are. And and that's because you're sitting in India.
[Guest]: I think that's a really important point, actually. And and if you if you will indulge me, I want
[Guest]: to go back and give you a little bit of history for myself to understand why I'm at where
[Guest]: I am. And I think where you are, why you are where you are, and like, what's the right
[Guest]: balance?
[Guest]: Absolutely.
[Guest]: So I'm more optimistic. That's correct. But I wasn't always more optimistic. When I was
[Guest]: in college. One of the things that I wanted to do, you know, when I was growing up, I
[Guest]: was always, we only went on vacation to one place, which is India, every two years, we'd
[Guest]: go on a month long vacation to India, visit our relatives, and we wouldn't have a vacation
[Guest]: in between. Then, you know, when I went off to college, I wasn't part of that process
[Guest]: as much as anymore, I couldn't take up a month, but I decided to spend a summer working in
[Guest]: India for Mother Teresa at Asha Don in Mumbai. And during that time, I got to see poverty
[Guest]: up close and personal in a way that I didn't even get to see when we were visiting family
[Guest]: in India. We're not all prosperous in India, but but not to the extent that I saw when
[Guest]: I was in Mumbai, working at Asha Don. And I thought that it was very important to work
[Guest]: in India, and that you could do a lot more good there than than hanging out in the United
[Guest]: States. But at the same time, I had an experience with just regular bureaucracy in India, whether
[Guest]: it's taking money out of the bank, whether it's navigating traffic, or whether it's navigating
[Guest]: the medical system for some of the some of the people that we saw there. This is also
[Guest]: in the middle of the AIDS epidemic in India, too. So I saw a little bit about the way a
[Guest]: little bit had insight into how we were treating HIV and AIDS patients. And I became hugely
[Guest]: pessimistic, hugely pessimistic, and then spent almost the next, you know, 15 years
[Guest]: avoiding India, focusing on the United States, maybe 20 years, 15. And it was only that distance
[Guest]: that allowed me to, you know, kind of forget, become less cynical, and reembrace with India.
[Guest]: Now, I didn't, I still had that history. So I knew that it existed. And so I approached
[Guest]: in a different way, which is I just lowered my expectations. And I forced myself to reassess
[Guest]: what I should expect of India. It's also the case that I also stared at GDP growth rates
[Guest]: in India, and per capita GDP and saw that India had made remarkable progress from say
[Guest]: 85 to even 2005 to 2010. And that there was something significant going on in India. So
[Guest]: there was a lot of potential there. I think those two things brought me back and made
[Guest]: me much more optimistic. Probably idiosyncratic, I had interaction with a number of positive
[Guest]: with bureaucrats that really inspired me in Karnataka, and elsewhere, they kept me on
[Guest]: this track. Obviously, I get disappointed as well. But because I think my expectations
[Guest]: are a little bit different. And being able to go back and forth from India, to the United
[Guest]: States helps renew that optimism. And one of the things I like to tell folks that are,
[Guest]: you know, my colleagues in India that are a little bit more pessimistic is to understand
[Guest]: that, you know, if you got deeply involved in American politics, you too would become
[Guest]: very cynical. And so India is not not always all that bad. It's good to sometimes step
[Guest]: away. So anyway, that's, that's my kind of brief repost to the differences between us.
[Guest]: So I would say Amit, next time, come on out to Chicago, I'll introduce you to some Chicago
[Guest]: politicians and then, you know, take a few weeks off. We'll be a little more closely
[Guest]: aligned. So but anyway, back to migrants. So yeah, I share your concerns. I think I
[Guest]: believe that urbanization is key driver growth in India. And that, you know, we see very
[Guest]: few societies that are high income societies or a high fraction of their population is
[Guest]: still engaging in agricultural labor. Yet we see that in India, it is unlikely to be
[Guest]: the case that if India wants to be high income, that will continue. And that implies that
[Guest]: people not only move out of agriculture, but very likely move into cities, which are responsible
[Guest]: for a disproportionate amount of India's growth. And I was very optimistic about that prior
[Guest]: to COVID. And you know, my big concern was why don't more people move in? How do we make
[Guest]: cities more accommodating? How do we build infrastructure in cities and things like that?
[Guest]: COVID throws a wrench in all that. I think the lockdown in cities was hugely painful
[Guest]: to not just migrant income, but broadly the poor in cities, especially the interruption
[Guest]: of essential services. I also think that that in combination with the higher case load per
[Guest]: capita and higher death toll per capita in cities, makes cities less hospitable. And
[Guest]: the way that I think about it is, you know, I think of migrants as kind of the marginal
[Guest]: movers to cities. That is to say, they're the last people in and they're the ones that
[Guest]: get the least benefit, but they are getting a benefit. So if you reduce the value of cities,
[Guest]: those are the first people to leave because they're the ones that are made, you know,
[Guest]: they go from being, you know, seeing cities as a small positive benefit to seeing cities
[Guest]: as a negative as compared to people in the higher up on the income ladder. So it's not
[Guest]: surprising to me that you're seeing these numbers of 7.5 million or 11 million people
[Guest]: leaving cities to go back to their home state or to rural areas in the same state.
[Guest]: Now the real question is, is this a good thing or a bad thing? And what's likely to happen
[Guest]: in the future and what can we do about it? I think that in the short run, you know, I
[Guest]: can see why people leave and why they're going back. It makes sense to me. The real challenge
[Guest]: though is just, you know, how well will the states like UP, Bihar, et cetera, absorb these
[Guest]: people both in terms of COVID, are they able to effectively engage in quarantine of the
[Guest]: high-risk individuals so that COVID doesn't spread in rural areas in those states? I think
[Guest]: that's one of the big risks that we have right now with the return, very short-term risk
[Guest]: from the migration. It's very much like the studies that it reminds me of is the early
[Guest]: study done in the United States showing that before the lockdown, when COVID, we now know
[Guest]: in hindsight, was really affecting New York City, before the lockdown happened there,
[Guest]: people fled New York City to other parts of the U.S. And now we realize that other parts
[Guest]: of the U.S. that COVID that you see there can be, genomic analysis suggests that you
[Guest]: can trace its ancestry back to the New York strains, meaning that the flight from New
[Guest]: York is really what spread COVID around the country. And so I'm a little bit worried that
[Guest]: that's going to happen now. The people in cities who are infected are going to go to
[Guest]: rural areas that have largely avoided infection in the past. And now you're going to see small
[Guest]: outbreaks in rural areas, complicating control. So that's a very short-term concern I have.
[Guest]: And the question is how states are able to handle that, and what kind of, can they do
[Guest]: humane quarantine to mitigate those effects? So that's the immediate consequence. And then,
[Guest]: of course, the next consequence is, you know, what is the impact? Not only are you going
[Guest]: to see growth in cities, which is a big driver of growth in India, but you're also going
[Guest]: to see overwhelmed systems, perhaps, in these states that weren't expecting this large influx.
[Guest]: You know, just to give you a sense, we're working with Bihar. Bihar has a population
[Guest]: of 100 million, roughly, and they're expecting to get 2 to 3 million back. So 2 to 3 percent
[Guest]: of their population is coming back, which is a large number. It seems small, but from
[Guest]: a social organization perspective, that's quite a large influx. So that's going to be
[Guest]: a big thing.
[Guest]: But the question is, what is the consequence going forward? Like, are people going to,
[Guest]: you know, is this just a temporary return to get some relief? Remember, it's still the
[Guest]: height of the summer. There's still agriculture going on, so there's some rural demand. Maybe
[Guest]: once cities, you know, control the infection, lockdown, it gets lifted in the big cities,
[Guest]: then maybe these people will immediately return, in which case we're back to the same path
[Guest]: as before. Obviously, there's going to be a short-term economic crunch, especially on
[Guest]: the poor, but hopefully we'll be able to return in a year.
[Guest]: The alternative view is that people have just revised their views of the value of cities.
[Guest]: If their belief is now that epidemics are possible and are going to come again, then
[Guest]: it's going to take a little bit more for them to move to cities, which means you're going
[Guest]: to see a slowing, a slowdown in the rate of urbanization in India. First, an immediate
[Guest]: drop and then a slowing down of the return, which is hugely problematic from the perspective
[Guest]: of India's economic development. Now, the question is, what do we do about that? And
[Guest]: I can think of two things, or at least I'm thinking along two lines. The first is, for
[Guest]: a lot of the states that are getting migrants back, if they can look beyond the short-term
[Guest]: crunch, they might see an opportunity. And what I mean by opportunity is, you know, if
[Guest]: you're a state like Bihar or UP and you're getting a lot of migrants back, historically,
[Guest]: you're a state that has economically lagged behind other states. And one of the reasons
[Guest]: we think is because there is not as much urbanization in your states. You see a lot of small towns,
[Guest]: but you don't see big cities. Big cities are much more common in the more developed states,
[Guest]: especially in the south. And so the question is, can you figure out a way to get your migrants,
[Guest]: instead of in some time in the future returning to Mumbai, Delhi, Chennai, et cetera, can
[Guest]: you get them to go to cities in your state? So this is a great opportunity for you to
[Guest]: urbanize quickly, provide a path for your migrants to go to local cities and grow those
[Guest]: cities, take your tier three cities and make them tier two cities or better. So that's
[Guest]: in some sense an opportunity, and that's what I encourage states in the Northern Belt to
[Guest]: do with their returning migrants, see that as an opportunity.
[Guest]: The second thing is that, you know, when we think more broadly about cities, this is a
[Guest]: chance for us to kind of reassess how to make cities better, especially for the poor. And
[Guest]: the fact that a lot of migrants have actually left gives you an opportunity to really restructure
[Guest]: things. You know, the first and foremost is you need better infrastructure. Your cities
[Guest]: are growing faster than your underlying street and sanitation infrastructure, and you really
[Guest]: need to kind of invest in that. That's the first thing. To do that, obviously, you'll
[Guest]: need more local control and local financing that's a little bit better. That's going to
[Guest]: have to be part of the answer, too, but really build that infrastructure.
[Guest]: The second approach is to become a little bit more hospitable to migrants, to labor
[Guest]: migrants. And we're going to see that it's very hard to operate a city when a large fraction
[Guest]: of your drivers, security guards, household help, et cetera, construction workers disappear.
[Guest]: It's going to be hard to restart the city. You're going to appreciate that that labor
[Guest]: is essential. Once you have that appreciation, it's going to be important to do things to
[Guest]: make life easier for those people. That means, for example, you know, one of the big issues
[Guest]: with slums is that there's the reason why we have slums is because we have restrictions
[Guest]: on the growth of housing supply in cities, housing regulations, FSI regulations, things
[Guest]: like that. And if we could relax some of those, that would be great. Another restriction is
[Guest]: just so much land that's owned by the state. If the state can start handing over land rights
[Guest]: to slum dwellers, that'll entice people to come back and feel a little bit more secure
[Guest]: living in cities. I think that's the second thing.
[Guest]: A third issue, maybe this should have been the first issue, is to start really investing
[Guest]: in public health, meaning allow the private sector in the health care system to deal with
[Guest]: regular transactions for health, but have the public infrastructure, the public hospitals
[Guest]: really focus on public health. So things like infectious disease and trying to help poor
[Guest]: individuals make sure they have access to health care. Having that kind of renewed focus,
[Guest]: narrow focus would be good. And cities really need to be at the start of that if they want
[Guest]: to get these migrants back. So those are the three things that I would think would be really
[Guest]: important.
[Guest]: I just want to stress again, one really, really important component of that second part is
[Guest]: that not only do you provide housing to these individuals, to low-income people, but you
[Guest]: get rid of a lot of the required occupational licensing and other regulations that make
[Guest]: it really, really hard for people to work in cities, whether it's as a shoeshine or
[Guest]: starting your own small pawn shop or something like that. That's got to go away. You've got
[Guest]: to make it easier for people to economically thrive in cities without all these regulations.
[Guest]: COVID is an opportunity to revisit that. We wouldn't have been able to do that in peacetime
[Guest]: because of a lot of vested interests. But now the vested interests are kind of back
[Guest]: on their heels. And so while that's happening, this is a real opportunity to make life a
[Guest]: little bit easier for poor individuals, poor people in cities.
[Amit Varma]: But these are, you know, great and insightful points. I'll quickly take the opportunity
[Amit Varma]: to plug episodes that I have done in the past on some of these subjects. They'll be linked
[Amit Varma]: from the show notes. I've done episodes on FSI and rent control with Alex Tabarrok. I've
[Amit Varma]: done an episode on slums with Pawan Srinath, where he spoke about how slums actually play
[Amit Varma]: an essential role because they're the entry point of migrants from outside the city to
[Amit Varma]: the city. And the solution of that, of course, as you pointed out, is increase the housing
[Amit Varma]: supply. Changing our regulations around FSI is a great way of doing that. I have also
[Amit Varma]: recorded an episode with Prashant Narang on this kind of licensing within cities, which
[Amit Varma]: is such a problem, but that will release after this one, perhaps in a couple of weeks. I've
[Amit Varma]: taken more than a couple of hours of your time. So I'm sort of now going to ask you
[Amit Varma]: to sort of look into the economist's crystal ball and sort of look ahead and tell me what
[Amit Varma]: are, you know, if you look five years into the future, what is sort of a best case scenario
[Amit Varma]: and what is a worst case scenario? In other words, what gives you hope and what gives
[Amit Varma]: you despair? Like I've heard it said, like someone framed it in a way on Twitter, the
[Amit Varma]: optimistic side of things, which really struck me where I forget who this was. But this person
[Amit Varma]: basically said that COVID is like a vaccine, which will give us the antibodies to fight
[Amit Varma]: future pandemics, which might otherwise be worse. And I guess that's a very optimistic
[Guest]: view. But what gives you reason for hope and despair? Okay, so I'll answer both parts.
[Guest]: The first is I want to kind of give you worst case, best case. So the worst case scenarios,
[Guest]: I think we already touched upon partly. I think that there's a risk that you're seeing
[Guest]: de-urbanization that's going to last for longer than we hope. And that's going to slow growth
[Guest]: structurally in India. That's one. Another thing that I think is very important is I
[Guest]: fear that we're in for a rude macro awakening. So let me explain what I mean by that. So
[Guest]: when we think about what COVID does, you should think about whether or not you think that
[Guest]: there's a lockdown or not. There's two effects. There's an aggregate supply effect and aggregate
[Guest]: demand effect. The aggregate supply effect comes first. Either voluntary social distancing
[Guest]: or mandatory lockdowns restrict your ability to work. So supply shifts in. That reduces
[Guest]: the amount of economic activity and in general will tend to raise prices. But then there's
[Guest]: a second effect that goes on. It offsets that a little bit, but worsens part of it, which
[Guest]: is that because there's less supply, there's less income that people have. They can't work,
[Guest]: so their incomes fall. So that reduces demand. So you have both the aggregate supply effect
[Guest]: followed by an aggregate demand effect. The net result is a massive reduction in the amount
[Guest]: of economic activity, although the ambiguous effect on prices. Now, governments have responded
[Guest]: outside of the public health context by typically trying to address what they can, and that
[Guest]: is the aggregate demand effect. The way they do that is they increase supports to people.
[Guest]: So in the United States, we gave out a bunch of checks to people to help supplement their
[Guest]: income. And in India, you do some of that as well, although to a much lesser extent.
[Guest]: And the idea here is basically do what we can. We can't address the aggregate supply
[Guest]: issue because that's necessary for the or uncontrollable because of the COVID crisis.
[Guest]: But the demand side, we can give people income. Now, the question is where governments got
[Guest]: that money from in the first place. Now, ordinarily, if we were to think about just one country
[Guest]: having suffering a shock like this, they would get a loan from the World Bank or from other
[Guest]: countries going to the sovereign debt market to get money. But here we have a situation
[Guest]: where the entire world is wanting to spend more. Now, there are some countries that had
[Guest]: the surplus to do so, China, for example, but most countries didn't have that surplus.
[Guest]: They were already operating with massive amounts of debt. And so in a world where there's more
[Guest]: debt and everybody wants more money, there really is only one way that you give stimulus
[Guest]: checks. It's by printing money. Now, we may mask it in very different ways, but what we're
[Guest]: doing is we're printing money.
[Guest]: Now, anybody that knows how inflation works, like you use the quantity theory of money,
[Guest]: you have a standard equation, Fisher's equation that tells you what the price levels are.
[Guest]: And what it says is that the total supply of money is equal to the quantity of money
[Guest]: that's available times the number of transactions that you have with money per day. And that
[Guest]: gives you the daily supply. So not only is how many rupees there are, but how many times
[Guest]: a given rupee circulates in a day tells you what the total supply of rupees is in that
[Guest]: day.
[Guest]: And in COVID, you have the following situation. Because you have this aggregate supply effect,
[Guest]: people are not able to buy and sell goods. Velocity of money has fallen. Now, you can
[Guest]: print more money and you're increasing the money supply, but you're not going to have
[Guest]: a big effect on prices because again, velocity is down. So if total supply is the amount
[Guest]: printed times the velocity and the velocity has gone down, you can print more and kind
[Guest]: of keep prices stable. Does that make sense?
[Guest]: Makes absolute sense. Go on.
[Guest]: Yeah. So now imagine what happens if over the next few months, you relax the constraint
[Guest]: on supply. So the velocity rises. So now you've printed a whole bunch of money and now you're
[Guest]: going to relax constraints that limit velocity. Velocity is going to rise. You're going to
[Guest]: see a massive increase in effective money supply later on, not right now, later on as
[Guest]: velocity rises. And that's going to trigger a binge of inflation. Okay. And you're going
[Guest]: to have all the issues that come up with inflation that we've seen in the past and negative consequences,
[Guest]: except this is going to be a weird inflation crisis because the inflation crisis where
[Guest]: you've got this stock of money that's finally being released to circulate in the society.
[Guest]: And we're going to have to figure out how to solve that problem. I'm not going to tell
[Guest]: you that I know the answer to that, but one of the kind of the worst case scenarios that
[Guest]: I worry about is a global hyperinflation problem or a global inflation problem. If we were
[Guest]: 50 years ahead and everything was cryptocurrency or electronic money, the way you'd solve it
[Guest]: is you'd proportionally reduce everybody's money stock, just the same way you would inflate,
[Guest]: you would deflate, but we're not in that position. There's still money that's there and you have
[Guest]: to figure out a way to pull money out of that system in order to control that inflation.
[Guest]: So I worry a little bit about this. My prediction, if I were to make one, is that that's one
[Guest]: of the causes of the worst case scenario. And that's something that macroeconomists
[Guest]: will be thinking about that they don't have an answer to right now.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah. And it could hurt the poor the most because inflation first and foremost is a
[Amit Varma]: tax on the poor. So after what they have already been through, you know, the vicious cycle
[Amit Varma]: just continues.
[Guest]: Exactly right. So let's not dwell on only the negative. Let's try the positive because
[Guest]: I think on net, I'm positive. To me, that stuff just tells me that this effect, it's
[Guest]: not just the health component that's going to take a few years to resolve. It's going
[Guest]: to be the economic component that's going to take a few years to resolve.
[Guest]: But what I'm hoping is that the positive outweighs the benefits. And this is consistent with
[Guest]: my general optimistic view about the world that I've learned about myself. So the first
[Guest]: is the issue that you pointed out, which is, you know, maybe we'll learn to handle future
[Guest]: epidemics better. I'm optimistic that that'll be the case. You know, all of us have a role
[Guest]: here to play, which is to hold governments accountable to doing that preparation going
[Guest]: forward. So we should keep the pressure on for that and provide the assistance that we
[Guest]: can.
[Guest]: The second thing is I'm hoping that we are able to take this kind of de-urbanization
[Guest]: as an opportunity to renew and strengthen our cities. And I'm optimistic that we'll
[Guest]: do that. You know, what's amazing to me is that almost everybody I talk to, and I understand
[Guest]: that that's a selected group, but almost everybody I talk to, with very few exceptions, generally
[Guest]: has this view that cities are a driver of growth in India, that we need to do better
[Guest]: by migrant workers and slums. And we often agree on what the policies are. And the real
[Guest]: issue is how do we get the government to engage in those policies? To me, that's really a
[Guest]: problem of trying to understand what vested interests stand in the way and how do you
[Guest]: come up with good second best policies to buy off those vested interests so you get
[Guest]: better policies. That to me is the challenge going forward, but I'm optimistic that we'll
[Guest]: be able to challenge it to address it with urbanization in India as well.
[Guest]: The more complicated thing, I think, is really what do you do if there are structural features
[Guest]: of the political system in India that make it so that it cannot achieve, for example,
[Guest]: the trajectory that, say, China was on pre-COVID? So this has to do with issues of political
[Guest]: competition leading to corruption in ways that China is able to control better than
[Guest]: we are able to control. This is the sort of things that people like James Robinson or
[Guest]: that Chang-Tai Hsieh, both colleagues of mine at the University of Chicago debate, and that
[Guest]: I think are an important debate for us to have in India. So in that sense, I am optimistic,
[Guest]: but I think that we have to keep our eye on the ball going forward. I hope to see that,
[Guest]: you know, in 10 years, India is just on a better path, especially if we're able to address
[Guest]: a lot of the issues that you've raised in prior podcasts and use this opportunity to
[Guest]: make those changes.
[Amit Varma]: Anup, thanks so much for being so generous with your time and insights. You've given
[Amit Varma]: me a lot, and I'm sure you've given our listeners a lot to process in the course of this conversation.
[Amit Varma]: So thanks a lot for coming on the Scene and the Unseen.
[Guest]: My pleasure. This was a fun conversation.
[Amit Varma]: If you enjoyed listening to the show, do check out the show notes, which has many relevant
[Amit Varma]: links. You can follow Anup on Twitter at Anup underscore Malani. You can follow me at Amit
[Amit Varma]: Verma, A-M-I-T-V-A-R-M-A. You can browse past episodes of the Scene and the Unseen at sceneunseen.in.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you for listening.
[Amit Varma]: Did you enjoy this episode of the Scene and the Unseen? If so, would you like to support
[Amit Varma]: the production of the show? You can go over to sceneunseen.in slash support and contribute
[Amit Varma]: any amount you like to keep this podcast alive and kicking. Thank you.